The first four leaders had broken knees
The four old dams had broken knees
The flock would start to run, then freeze
The first four leaders had broken knees

The dog explained.
The hawk exclaimed:
and leaves me home to clean his dirt.
to bring his breaking power to bear
while the dog warned, in his dog run:

He lies in a dumb lump under the trees,
Than lose our blood and suddenly freeze
But the oldest dam gave her leg a lick,
A few run away and the rest crawl,
Damn his soul.
But I myself would bring him low
All the old photographs, hidden like buried
Treasure. Broken prayer sticks under my dreams
And my worn mattress. Each one like a postcard sent back
Home; wonders only seen in slick travel magazines.

Like a blue lightning strike over the northern sky,
Over two black houses, I pull the first leaf out, at random.
A picture-flash: Tom and Susie Worker are sitting together
Blue to black to white, shifting like rain clouds to clear skies.
My grandparents look tired. The day was Christmas 1992,
With a little bit of snow on the Earth. Tired from traveling
Over 100 miles away from their painted desert
To the city, tired from raising eleven children of the Deer
Spring before the Depression, before Roosevelt,
Before the World Wars, before computers, before
Satellite phones and televisions . . . . Outside, the north wind
Eyes are glazed red from happiness. Outside,
The clouds swelled full of snow and ice.
A blue lightning flash, another photograph, another place:
New York, 1985: I see the Statue of Liberty, tiny, like a pin
Stuck in the gray ocean, surrounded by the wrought metal
Edges of Gotham City. It was the only picture I took:
The dollar-bill green lady holding her torch, guiding
Moths, reality, men and ferries. As she stood in iconic
Pose, Grandma flooded back, quickly: strong in her own green
Velvet dress, she stretched dough over her palms, making frybread.
My mind refocused on the warm glow of a new moon.
Turquoise and silver brooch. Made from a thousand tiny Kingman
A sunflower high on a green stem. Each seed a raindrop
Made of smooth sky. When the sun touched the brooch,
It was blinding. A perfect mosaic of water-light-sky stones.
The Staten Island ferry moves on to Crow Agency, Montana.
At Custer Battlefield, my cousins smile for a picture, tourists
They hold up cans of Coors Light waiting for Custer to rise
Again so they can take up their bows, arrows, uzis. Warriors,
Proud and ready to hide deep in the yellowtail prairie grass.
Their women and children safe in tipi camps by the Little
Bighorn River. I know they would die again and again. Rise
Again and again to put up more white marble tombstones.
They would do this to save our future children, to save our
Sonny Black Eagle, Tom Worker, the horned toad . . . .
Lodge Grass Indians, the high school basketball team, plays
Her basketball team is waiting for the final winning basket
To end time, an orange ball to shoot dead the visiting team
From Billings. Another war of Savages versus Whites.
Raven feathers, a deep cold night fueled by a bonfire and beer.
Lined by a hundred cars, nights caws, and some more tame
Drinking brawls. All night long, the happy Indian basketball
Left with one of the blue-eyed. He na ya na . . . .
My brothers smile with big white teeth, have strong backs like their

Was here to see her young Crow and Navajo boys, their hearts full
Of wild war ponies. But because of old age, she was put in a home

Grandma is there captured within the state-certified white walls.
In the many stainless steel items of the room: the nearby syringe,
The mirror, the drinking cup, the stethoscope. The nurse turns off
The television, it buzzes and flashes a bright blue dot that burns
Shadows on film behind the great family photo. Our pasts
Flood back from the Sea of Forgetfulness . . . . Old girlfriends,
To brothers, cousins, sisters, friends. Their demands are frenzied
As mean seagulls overwhelming me holding a bag of popcorn:
Burn those! Burn them up! Why the hell did you keep them alive?!
I should burn them so that the stars can smell the rising visions.
When the sunrise burns the nightmares, like flies stuck on the silk
In a dreamcatcher, the visions explode into flares. Bright as a blue
Her reservation home with its sleek red canyons, rabbit brush,
The Grand Canyon. A place filled with the awe of fairy dust,
Is empty of foul smells. And there staring at me is my last image:
Never have names and the only word they ever learn
A command as heavy as hail shattering a windshield:
Watch out for sheep-stealing coyotes.
They all run like hurt boys glancing up to see if the sky will fall.
This one sheep dog is a mutt sitting next to his empty
One eye is Hungry, one eye is Lonely. With only
A life span of three years, a sheep dog dies from the elements,
Fighting a mountain lion, or from a gunshot wound
(For a developing a taste for tender lamb).
Taking care of sheep is their story. Like the many tribes
Wiped out from smallpox long before the white man
Gave the tribe a history, and because we forgot them,
They, the sheep dogs, die nameless too. When Grandma was happy
With her sheep dogs, she would feed them a can of government
Peanut butter and watch them chew, chew, chew. Licking.
She watched each one lick its teeth and fur for hours . . . .
I can still hear her laughing about her sheep dogs.
Ruminant pillows! Gregarious soft boulders!
If one of you found a gap in a stone wall,
mothers and daughters, old grandfather-father,
followed onward, stupid
as sheep, wherever
My grandfather spent all day searching the valley
and edges of Ragged Mountain,

When the shirt wore out, and darns in the woolen
shirt needed darning,
a woman in a white collar
cut the shirt into strips and braided it,
as she braided her hair every morning.
In a hundred years
the knees of her great-granddaughter
crawled on a rug made from the wool of sheep
whose bones were mud,
like the bones of the woman, who stares
from an oval in the parlor.

I forked the brambly hay down to you
in nineteen-fifty. I delved my hands deep
in the winter grass of your hair.
When the shearer cut to your nakedness in April
and you dropped black eyes in shame,
hiding in barnyard corners, unable to hide,
I brought grain to raise your spirits,
and ten thousand years
wound us through pasture and hayfield together,
threads of us woven
together, three hundred generations

You were not shrewd like the pig.
You were not strong like the horse.
You were not brave like the rooster.
Yet none of the others looked like a lump of granite
that grew hair,
and none of the others
carried white fleece as soft as dandelion seed
around a black face,
and none of them sang such a flat and sociable song.

Now the black-faced sheep have wandered and will not return,
even if I should search the valleys
Now the railroad draws
a line of rust through the valley. Birch, pine, and maple
lean from cellarholes
and cover the dead pastures of Ragged Mountain
except where machines make snow
and cables pull money up hill, to slide back down.

where the great-grandfathers of the forty-acre farms
filled every pew.
I look out the window at summer places,
with swimming pools cunningly added to cowsheds,
old lumps of wool, and we read
that the rich farmer, though he names his farm for himself,
takes nothing into his grave;
that even if people praise us, because we are successful,
we will go under the ground
to meet our ancestors collected there in the darkness;
that we are all of us sheep, and death is our shepherd,
and we die as the animals die.
You, my friends, and you strangers, all of you,
Stand with me a little by the walls
Or where the walls once were.
The bridge was here, the city further:
A doorway where the roof is down
Opens on a foot-worn stair
That climbs by three steps into empty air.
(What foot went there?)
Nothing in this town that had a thousand steeples
Lives now but these flocks of sheep
Grazing the yellow grasses where the bricks lie dead beneath:
Dogs drive them with their brutal teeth.
Can none but sheep live where the walls go under?
And shall we sit here like the mourners on a dunghill
Disfiguring our faces with the nails of our despair?
(What dust is this we sift upon our hair?)
Because a world is taken from us as the camels from the man of Uz
Shall we sit weeping for the world that was
And curse God and so perish?
Shall monuments be grass and sheep inherit them?
Shall dogs rule in the rubble of the arches?
Consider, Oh consider what we are!
He who makes his journey by the glimmer of a candle;
Who discovers in his mouth, between his teeth, a word;
Even the talk of it would take us days together.
The imagination of the shape of order!
Perfectly fitted to the sill of basalt!
The ceremony at the entering of houses,
At the entering of lives: the bride among the torches in the shrill carouse!
Pilgrimages through the desert to the sacred boulder:
Through the mid night to the stroke of one!
Works of grace! Works of wonder!
A man beneath the sunlight in his meaning:
A man, one man, a man alone.
In the sinks of the earth that wanderer has gone down.
The shadow of his mind is on the mountains.
The word he has said is kept in the place beyond
As the seed is kept and the earth ponders it.
And now because the city is a ruin in the waste of air
We sit here and despair!
Because the sheep graze in the dying grove
Our day is over!
We must end
Because the talk around the table in the dusk has ended,
Because the fingers of the goddesses are found
Like marble pebbles in the gravelly ground
Because the cloud proposes, the wind says!
Because the sheep are pastured where the staring statues lie
We sit upon the sand in silence
Watching the sun go and the shadows change!
Listen, my friends, and you, all of you, strangers,
Listen, the work of man, the work of splendor
Never has been ended or will end.
Even where the sheep defile the ruined stair
Even among the ruins shall begin the work,
Large in the level morning of the light
And beautiful with cisterns where the water whitens,
Rippling upon the lip of stone, and spills
By cedar sluices into pools, and the young builders
String their plumb lines, and the well-laid course
Blanches its mortar in the sun, and all the morning
Smells of wood-smoke, rope-tar, horse-sweat, pitch-pine,
Men and the trampled mint leaves in the ditch.
One man in the sun alone
Walks between the silence and the stone:
The city rises from his flesh, his bone.

Considering the frequency
out of context, lie through my teeth and smear
of division and contempt,
of fighting fire with dilemmas,
not just for me, but for any candidate.
Is it more important to lose honorably,
or to get into the gutter with your own particularity
when so much is the answer?
I love the pumpkin idea.
I will definitely use that and I also plan
I already have a guacamole rifle
to figure out how to do it.
If you have ideas for that please help.
Also on the splitting heads thing they
have that hydraulic wrench that
rips the brain chunks out of the
head you can do that so much
easier just get the fishing line attached
to the fragments and then fill 
a two to three liter soda bottle
with sand and throw it in the opposite
direction your life is going.
To see the results of this oscillatory combustion
phenomenon between the acoustics of the
cavity and the pyrolysis of the propellants
which were used in irreproducible ignition
which I never liked much anyway.
Too bad. I have typed out some abbreviated remains
living in them as if they were a book.
I spent the afternoon reveling
and wondering what
I need to do to get my own sheep.
I saw sheep herding and shearing,
admired the baby lambs, and followed
Farm boys wild to couple
In the hay-tunnel dark
I heard from somebody who ...
Their own true wives in the city,
The sheep are safe in the west hill
Still are not sure. Are we,
Because we remember, remembered
In the terrible dust of museums?
After I found out that you were a sheep,
it was always afternoon, and I stood trembling
at the pasture fence, my hands full of dandelion
and the longer grasses. How could I call you
to come near? We had no names and only
this place, this sun, the hill and its limitless sky
held together by your gentle outline as you leaned
toward tufts of grass. How beautiful you were,
so still, so close to moving. I gathered
bouquets of clover, strung violets from the fence slats.
Sometimes I whispered, but the words disappeared
Once I saw darkness. I remember my eyes were open
and there was nothing, only black, and my heart aching
as I felt for my face and I was still human. While I cried,
stars came and traced sheep in the sky and the voice that knew
never spoke. I fell asleep mistaking the scent of hay
for your breath. To wake once from the sleep in which
you are held, in which your name emanates without utterance
Now it is always afternoon. How can I call you
when we have no names? I search
for the clover and violets. There are always enough.
My shadow is always the same length and shaped
with arms and legs. Between us, the distance of field is green
Please. Come to me, remember me: undo this world.
Baa, baa, black sheep
Have you any wool?
Yes sir, yes sir, three bags full.
One for the master,
And one for the dame,
And one for the little boy
Who lives down the lane.

through 
and through 
sloe, cracked soot-
on-a-boot, 
nicotine spat, licorice whip. 
You can scratch, scratch, scratch 
but I stay underskin true 
to ebony, ink, crowberry, pitch;
hoist me up by my hooves 
chock full of coke, fuliginous 
murk.
coal by the bag, 
cinders and slag, 
scoriac grit, so please
come, comb 
through my fleece with hands pallid 
as snow and watch 
how they grow tarry, raven, 
or, if you wish, clean me with bleach
flinch, just char 
down to a core of caliginous 
marrow,
pure carbon, atramentous,
utterly piceous, 
shadowed, and starless,
each clumpity clump 
and eclipse of my heart raptly 
re-burnishing 
a woolgather dark.
nodding tho' the lamps lit low
nodding for passers underground
to and fro she's darning and
the yarn is weeping red and pale
marking the train stops from algiers
sleeping tho' the eyes are pale
hums in rhythum w/a bonnet on
lullaby a broken song
the sifting-cloth is bleeding red
weeping yarn from algiers
lullaby tho' baby's gone
the cradle rocks a barren song
she's rocking w/her ribbons on
she's rocking yarn and needles oh
it's long coming from algiers
Whan that Aprille with his shoures soote, 
The droghte of March hath perced to the roote, 
Whan Zephirus eek with his swete breeth 
Inspired hath in every holt and heeth 
The tendre croppes, and the yonge sonne 
Hath in the Ram his halfe cours y-ronne, 
And smale foweles maken melodye, 
That slepen al the nyght with open ye, 
Thanne longen folk to goon on pilgrimages, 
And palmeres for to seken straunge strondes, 
To ferne halwes, kowthe in sondry londes; 
And specially, from every shires ende 
Of Engelond, to Caunterbury they wende, 
The hooly blisful martir for to seke, 
That hem hath holpen whan that they were seeke. 
Bifil that in that seson on a day, 
In Southwerk at the Tabard as I lay, 
Redy to wenden on my pilgrymage 
To Caunterbury with ful devout corage, 
At nyght were come into that hostelrye 
Wel nyne and twenty in a compaignye 
In felaweshipe, and pilgrimes were they alle, 
That toward Caunterbury wolden ryde. 
The chambres and the stables weren wyde, 
And wel we weren esed atte beste. 
And shortly, whan the sonne was to reste, 
So hadde I spoken with hem everychon, 
That I was of hir felaweshipe anon, 
And made forward erly for to ryse, 
To take oure wey, ther as I yow devyse. 
But nathelees, whil I have tyme and space, 
Er that I ferther in this tale pace, 
Me thynketh it acordaunt to resoun 
To telle yow al the condicioun 
Of ech of hem, so as it semed me, 
And whiche they weren and of what degree, 
And eek in what array that they were inne; 
And at a Knyght than wol I first bigynne. 
A Knyght ther was, and that a worthy man, 
That fro the tyme that he first bigan 
To riden out, he loved chivalrie, 
Ful worthy was he in his lordes werre, 
And thereto hadde he riden, no man ferre, 
As wel in cristendom as in hethenesse, 
At Alisaundre he was whan it was wonne; 
Ful ofte tyme he hadde the bord bigonne 
Aboven alle nacions in Pruce. 
No cristen man so ofte of his degree. 
In Gernade at the seege eek hadde he be 
Of Algezir, and riden in Belmarye. 
At Lyeys was he, and at Satalye, 
Whan they were wonne; and in the Grete See 
At many a noble armee hadde he be. 
At mortal batailles hadde he been fiftene, 
And foughten for oure feith at Tramyssene 
In lyste thries, and ay slayn his foo. 
This ilke worthy knyght hadde been also 
Somtyme with the lord of Palatye 
Agayn another hethen in Turkye; 
And evermoore he hadde a sovereyn prys. 
And though that he were worthy, he was wys, 
And of his port as meeke as is a mayde. 
He nevere yet no vileynye ne sayde, 
In al his lyf, unto no maner wight. 
He was a verray, parfit, gentil knyght. 
But for to tellen yow of his array, 
His hors weren goode, but he was nat gay; 
Of fustian he wered a gypon 
For he was late y-come from his viage, 
And wente for to doon his pilgrymage. 
A lovyere and a lusty bacheler, 
With lokkes crulle as they were leyd in presse. 
Of twenty yeer of age he was, I gesse. 
And wonderly delyvere and of greet strengthe. 
And he hadde been somtyme in chyvachie 
In Flaundres, in Artoys, and Pycardie, 
And born hym weel, as of so litel space, 
In hope to stonden in his lady grace. 
Embrouded was he, as it were a meede 
Al ful of fresshe floures whyte and reede. 
Syngynge he was, or floytynge, al the day; 
He was as fressh as is the month of May. 
Short was his gowne, with sleves longe and wyde; 
Wel koude he sitte on hors and faire ryde; 
He koude songes make and wel endite, 
Juste and eek daunce, and weel purtreye and write. 
So hoote he lovede that by nyghtertale 
He sleep namoore than dooth a nyghtyngale. 
And carf biforn his fader at the table. 
At that tyme, for hym liste ride soo; 
And he was clad in cote and hood of grene. 
Wel koude he dresse his takel yemanly; 
And in his hand he baar a myghty bowe. 
And by his syde a swerd and a bokeler, 
And on that oother syde a gay daggere, 
Harneised wel and sharp as point of spere; 
A Cristophere on his brest of silver sheene. 
An horn he bar, the bawdryk was of grene. 
A forster was he, soothly as I gesse. 
Ther was also a Nonne, a Prioresse, 
That of hir smylyng was ful symple and coy; 
Hire gretteste ooth was but by seinte Loy, 
And she was cleped madame Eglentyne. 
Ful weel she soong the service dyvyne, 
Entuned in hir nose ful semely; 
And Frenssh she spak ful faire and fetisly, 
After the scole of Stratford atte Bowe, 
For Frenssh of Parys was to hire unknowe. 
At mete wel y-taught was she with-alle: 
She leet no morsel from hir lippes falle, 
Ne wette hir fyngres in hir sauce depe. 
Wel koude she carie a morsel and wel kepe 
In curteisie was set ful muchel hir list. 
Hire over-lippe wyped she so clene 
That in hir coppe ther was no ferthyng sene 
Of grece, whan she dronken hadde hir draughte. 
Ful semely after hir mete she raughte. 
And sikerly she was of greet desport, 
And peyned hire to countrefete cheere 
Of court, and been estatlich of manere, 
And to ben holden digne of reverence. 
But for to speken of hire conscience, 
She was so charitable and so pitous 
She wolde wepe if that she saugh a mous 
Kaught in a trappe, if it were deed or bledde. 
Of smale houndes hadde she, that she fedde 
With rosted flessh, or milk and wastel breed; 
But soore wepte she if oon of hem were deed, 
Or if men smoot it with a yerde smerte; 
And al was conscience and tendre herte. 
Ful semyly hir wympul pynched was; 
Hire nose tretys, her eyen greye as glas, 
Hir mouth ful smal and ther-to softe and reed; 
But sikerly she hadde a fair forheed; 
It was almoost a spanne brood, I trowe; 
For, hardily, she was nat undergrowe. 
Ful fetys was hir cloke, as I was war; 
Of smal coral aboute hire arm she bar 
A peire of bedes, gauded al with grene, 
And ther-on heng a brooch of gold ful sheene, 
On which ther was first write a crowned A, 
And after, Amor vincit omnia. 
Another Nonne with hire hadde she, 
That was hire chapeleyne, and Preestes thre. 
A Monk ther was, a fair for the maistrie, 
An outridere, that lovede venerie; 
A manly man, to been an abbot able. 
Ful many a deyntee hors hadde he in stable; 
And whan he rood, men myghte his brydel heere 
And eek as loude, as dooth the chapel belle, 
Ther as this lord was kepere of the celle. 
The reule of seint Maure or of seint Beneit, 
This ilke Monk leet olde thynges pace, 
And heeld after the newe world the space. 
He yaf nat of that text a pulled hen 
That seith that hunters ben nat hooly men, 
Ne that a monk, whan he is recchelees, 
This is to seyn, a monk out of his cloystre. 
But thilke text heeld he nat worth an oystre; 
And I seyde his opinioun was good. 
What sholde he studie and make hymselven wood, 
Upon a book in cloystre alwey to poure, 
As Austyn bit? How shal the world be served? 
Lat Austyn have his swynk to him reserved. 
Therfore he was a prikasour aright: 
Grehoundes he hadde, as swift as fowel in flight; 
Canto III appeared in the July, 1917 issue of Poetry. Originally part of what scholars call the "Ur-Cantos," this version of Canto III was later edited by Pound to become Canto I of his collected Cantos. The section that eventually became Canto I is highlighted in blue in the poem below. 

III 
Worker of miracles, dealer in levitation, 
In thoughts upon pure form, in alchemy, 
Full of plaintive charm, like Botticelli's, 
With half-transparent forms, lacking the vigor of gods. 
Thus Heydon, in a trance, at Bulverton, 
Had such a sight: 
Decked all in green, with sleeves of yellow silk 
Slit to the elbow, slashed with various purples. 
Her eyes were green as glass, her foot was leaf-like. 
She was adorned with choicest emeralds, 
And promised him the way of holy wisdom. 
"Pretty green bank," began the half-lost poem. 
Sought out the place, 
Pass each in his appropriate robes; 
Conversed with each, observed the varying fashion. 
And then comes Heydon. 
Let us hear John Heydon! 
(Then comes a note, my assiduous commentator: 
Not Psellus De Daemonibus, but Porphyry's Chances, 
In the thirteenth chapter, that "every intellect is omni-form.") 
Magnifico Lorenzo used the dodge, 
Says that he met Ficino 
In some Wordsworthian, false-pastoral manner, 
And that they walked along, stopped at a well-head, 
And heard deep platitudes about contentment 
From some old codger with an endless beard. 
"A daemon is not a particular intellect, 
But is a substance differed from intellect," 
Breaks in Ficino, 
That's out of Proclus, take your pick of them. 
Prefacing praise to his Pope Nicholas: 
"A man of parts, skilled in the subtlest sciences; 
A patron of the arts, of poetry; and of a fine discernment." 
Then comes a catalogue, his jewels of conversation. 
The prefaces, cut clear and hard: 
"Know then the Roman speech, a sacrament," 
Spread for the nations, eucharist of wisdom, 
Bread of the liberal arts. 
Sordello would have your heart to give to all the princes; 
Valla, the heart of Rome, 
Sustaining speech, set out before the people. 
Marius, Du Bellay, wept for the buildings, 
Baldassar Castiglione saw Raphael 
"Lead back the soul into its dead, waste dwelling," 
Corpore laniato; and Lorenzo Valla, 
Took a fat living from the Papacy" 
"More than the Roman city, the Roman speech" 
(Holds fast its part among the ever-living). 
"Not by the eagles only was Rome measured." 
"Wherever the Roman speech was, there was Rome," 
Wherever the speech crept, there was mastery 
Spoke with the law's voice while your Greek, logicians... 
More Greeks than one! Doughty's "divine Homeros" 
Came before sophistry. Justinopolitan 
Uncatalogued Andreas Divus, 
Gave him in Latin, 1538 in my edition, the rest uncertain, 
Caught up his cadence, word and syllable: 
"Down to the ships we went, set mast and sail, 
Black keel and beasts for bloody sacrifice, 
Weeping we went." 
I've strained my ear for -ensa, -ombra, and -ensa 
"And then went down to the ship, set keel to breakers, 
Forth on the godly sea; 
We set up mast and sail on the swarthy ship, 
Sheep bore we aboard her, and our bodies also 
Heavy with weeping. And winds from sternward 
Circe's this craft, the trim-coifed goddess. 
Then sat we amidships, wind jamming the tiller. 
Thus with stretched sail 
Sun to his slumber, shadows o'er all the ocean. 
Came we then to the bounds of deepest water, 
To the Kimmerian lands and peopled cities 
With glitter of sun-rays, 
Nor with stars stretched, nor looking back from heaven, 
Swartest night stretched over wretched men there. 
Thither we in that ship, unladed sheep there, 
The ocean flowing backward, came we through to the place 
Aforesaid by Circe. 
Here did they rites, Perimedes and Eurylochus, 
And drawing sword from my hip 
First mead and then sweet wine, 
Water mixed with white flour. 
Then prayed I many a prayer to the sickly death's-heads 
As set in Ithaca, sterile bulls of the best, 
For sacrifice, heaping the pyre with goods. 
Sheep, to Tiresias only, 
Black, and a bell sheep; 
Dark blood flowed in the fosse. 
Souls out of Erebus, cadaverous dead 
Of brides, of youths, and of many passing old, 
Virgins tender, souls stained with recent tears, 
Many men mauled with bronze lance-heads, 
Battle spoil, bearing yet dreary arms: 
These many crowded about me, 
With shouting, pallor upon me, cried to my men for more beasts; 
Poured ointment, cried to the gods, 
To Pluto the strong, and praised Proserpine. 
Unsheathed the narrow steel, 
I sat to keep off the impetuous, impotent dead 
Till I should hear Tiresias. 
But first Elpenor came, our friend Elpenor, 
Limbs that we left in the house of Circe, 
Unwept, unwrapped in sepulchre, since toils urged other, 
'Elpenor, how art thou come to this dark coast? 
Cam'st thou afoot, outstripping seamen?' And he in heavy speech: 
'Ill fate and abundant wine! I slept in Circe's ingle, 
Going down the long ladder unguarded, I fell against the buttress, 
Shattered the nape-nerve, the soul sought Avernus. 
But thou, O King, I bid remember me, unwept, unburied! 
Heap up mine arms, be tomb by the sea-board, and inscribed, 
A man of no fortune and with a name to come; 
And set my oar up, that I swung 'mid fellows.' 
Came then another ghost, whom I beat off, Anticlea, 
And then Tiresias, Theban, 
Holding his golden wand, knew me and spoke first: 
'Man of ill hour, why come a second time, 
Leaving the sunlight, facing the sunless dead and this joyless region? 
Stand from the fosse, move back, leave me my bloody bever, 
And I will speak you true speeches.' 
Sheathing the yellow sword. Dark blood he drank then 
And spoke: 'Lustrous Odysseus, shalt 
Return through spiteful Neptune, over dark seas, 
Lose all companions.' Foretold me the ways and the signs. 
Came then Anticlea, to whom I answered: 
'Fate drives me on through these deeps; I sought Tiresias.' 
I told her news of Troy, and thrice her shadow 
Faded in my embrace. 
Heard out their tales by that dark fosse, and sailed 
By sirens and thence outward and away, 
And unto Circe buried Elpenor's corpse." 
Lie quiet, Divus. 
M. D. three X's, Eight, with Aldus on the Frogs, 
(The thin clear Tuscan stuff 
Take we the Goddess, Venus: 
Aurean coronam habentem, pulchram, 
Cypri munimenta sortita est, maritime, 
Light on the foam, breathed on by zephyrs, 
And air-tending hours. Mirthful, orichalci, with golden 
Girdles and breast bands. 
Bearing the golden bough of Argicida. 
And then went down to the ship,
Set keel to breakers, forth on the godly seas, and
We set up mast and sail on that swart ship,
Bore sheep aboard her, and our bodies also
Heavy with weeping, and winds from sternward
Bore us out onward with bellying canvas,
Then sat we amidships, wind jamming the tiller,
Came we then to the bounds of deepest water,
To the Kimmerian lands, and peopled cities
Covered with close-webbed mist, unpierced ever
With glitter of sun-rays
Nor with stars stretched, nor looking back from heaven
Swartest night stretched over wretched men there.
The ocean flowing backward, came we then to the place
Aforesaid by Circe.
Here did they rites, Perimedes and Eurylochus,
And drawing sword from my hip
I dug the ell-square pitkin;
Poured we libations unto each the dead,
First mead and then sweet wine, water mixed with white flour.
As set in Ithaca, sterile bulls of the best
For sacrifice, heaping the pyre with goods,
A sheep to Tiresias only, black and a bell-sheep.
Dark blood flowed in the fosse,
Souls out of Erebus, cadaverous dead, of brides
Of youths and of the old who had borne much;
Souls stained with recent tears, girls tender,
Men many, mauled with bronze lance heads,
Battle spoil, bearing yet dreory arms,
These many crowded about me; with shouting,
Pallor upon me, cried to my men for more beasts;
Slaughtered the herds, sheep slain of bronze;
Poured ointment, cried to the gods,
To Pluto the strong, and praised Proserpine;
Unsheathed the narrow sword,
I sat to keep off the impetuous impotent dead,
Till I should hear Tiresias.
But first Elpenor came, our friend Elpenor,
Unburied, cast on the wide earth,
Limbs that we left in the house of Circe,
Unwept, unwrapped in sepulchre, since toils urged other.
And Anticlea came, whom I beat off, and then Tiresias Theban,
Holding his golden wand, knew me, and spoke first:
Lie quiet Divus. I mean, that is Andreas Divus,
In officina Wecheli, 1538, out of Homer.
And he sailed, by Sirens and thence outward and away
And unto Circe.
Cypri munimenta sortita est, mirthful, orichalchi, with golden
Girdles and breast bands, thou with dark eyelids
AND the first grey of morning fill'd the east,
And the fog rose out of the Oxus stream.
But all the Tartar camp along the stream
Was hush'd, and still the men were plunged in sleep;
Sohrab alone, he slept not; all night long
He had lain wakeful, tossing on his bed;
But when the grey dawn stole into his tent,
He rose, and clad himself, and girt his sword,
And took his horseman's cloak, and left his tent,
And went abroad into the cold wet fog,
Through the dim camp to Peran-Wisa's tent.
     Through the black Tartar tents he pass'd, which stood
Clustering like bee-hives on the low flat strand
Of Oxus, where the summer-floods o'erflow
When the sun melts the snows in high Pamere;
Through the black tents he pass'd, o'er that low strand,
And to a hillock came, a little back
Crossing the stream in summer, scrapes the land.
The men of former times had crown'd the top
With a clay fort; but that was fall'n, and now
The Tartars built there Peran-Wisa's tent,
A dome of laths, and o'er it felts were spread.
And Sohrab came there, and went in, and stood
Upon the thick piled carpets in the tent,
And found the old man sleeping on his bed
Of rugs and felts, and near him lay his arms.
And Peran-Wisa heard him, though the step
Was dull'd; for he slept light, an old man's sleep;
     "Who art thou? for it is not yet clear dawn.
Speak! is there news, or any night alarm?"
"Thou know'st me, Peran-Wisa! it is I.
The sun is not yet risen, and the foe
Sleep; but I sleep not; all night long I lie
Tossing and wakeful, and I come to thee.
For so did King Afrasiab bid me seek
Thy counsel, and to heed thee as thy son,
In Samarcand, before the army march'd;
And I will tell thee what my heart desires.
Thou know'st if, since from Ader-baijan first
I came among the Tartars and bore arms,
I have still served Afrasiab well, and shown,
At my boy's years, the courage of a man.
This too thou know'st, that while I still bear on
The conquering Tartar ensigns through the world,
And beat the Persians back on every field,
Rustum, my father; who I hoped should greet,
Should one day greet, upon some well-fought field,
His not unworthy, not inglorious son.
So I long hoped, but him I never find.
Come then, hear now, and grant me what I ask.
Let the two armies rest to-day; but I
Will challenge forth the bravest Persian lords
To meet me, man to man; if I prevail,
Old man, the dead need no one, claim no kin.
Dim is the rumour of a common fight,
Where host meets host, and many names are sunk;
But of a single combat fame speaks clear."
     He spoke; and Peran-Wisa took the hand
     "O Sohrab, an unquiet heart is thine!
Canst thou not rest among the Tartar chiefs,
And share the battle's common chance with us
Who love thee, but must press for ever first,
In single fight incurring single risk,
To find a father thou hast never seen?
That were far best, my son, to stay with us
Unmurmuring; in our tents, while it is war,
And when 'tis truce, then in Afrasiab's towns.
But, if this one desire indeed rules all,
Seek him in peace, and carry to his arms,
O Sohrab, carry an unwounded son!
But far hence seek him, for he is not here.
For now it is not as when I was young,
When Rustum was in front of every fray;
But now he keeps apart, and sits at home,
In Seistan, with Zal, his father old.
Whether that his own mighty strength at last
Feels the abhorr'd approaches of old age,
Or in some quarrel with the Persian King.
Danger or death awaits thee on this field.
Fain would I know thee safe and well, though lost
To us; fain therefore send thee hence, in peace
To seek thy father, not seek single fights
From ravening, and who govern Rustum's son?
Go, I will grant thee what thy heart desires."
     So said he, and dropp'd Sohrab's hand, and left
His bed, and the warm rugs whereon he lay;
And o'er his chilly limbs his woollen coat
He pass'd, and tied his sandals on his feet,
And threw a white cloak round him, and he took
In his right hand a ruler's staff, no sword;
And on his head he set his sheep-skin cap,
Black, glossy, curl'd, the fleece of Kara-Kul;
And raised the curtain of his tent, and call'd
His herald to his side, and went abroad.
     The sun by this had risen, and clear'd the fog
From the broad Oxus and the glittering sands.
And from their tents the Tartar horsemen filed
Haman, who next to Peran-Wisa ruled
The host, and still was in his lusty prime.
From their black tents, long files of horse, they stream'd;
As when some grey November morn the files,
In marching order spread, of long-neck'd cranes
Stream over Casbin and the southern slopes
Of Elburz, from the Aralian estuaries,
Or some frore Caspian reed-bed, southward bound
The Tartars of the Oxus, the King's guard,
First, with black sheep-skin caps and with long spears;
Large men, large steeds; who from Bokhara come
And Khiva, and ferment the milk of mares.
Next, the more temperate Toorkmuns of the south,
The Tukas, and the lances of Salore,
And those from Attruck and the Caspian sands;
Light men and on light steeds, who only drink
The acrid milk of camels, and their wells.
And then a swarm of wandering horse, who came
From far, and a more doubtful service own'd;
The Tartars of Ferghana, from the banks
Of the Jaxartes, men with scanty beards
And close-set skull-caps; and those wilder hordes
Who roam o'er Kipchak and the northern waste,
Kalmucks and unkempt Kuzzaks, tribes who stray
Nearest the Pole, and wandering Kirghizzes,
Who come on shaggy ponies from Pamere;
These all filed out from camp into the plain.
First a light cloud of horse, Tartars they seem'd,
The Ilyats of Khorassan, and behind,
The royal troops of Persia, horse and foot,
Marshall'd battalions bright in burnish'd steel.
But Peran-Wisa with his herald came,
Threading the Tartar squadrons to the front,
And with his staff kept back the foremost ranks.
And when Ferood, who led the Persians, saw
That Peran-Wisa kept the Tartars back,
He took his spear, and to the front he came,
And check'd his ranks, and fix'd them where they stood.
And the old Tartar came upon the sand
     "Ferood, and ye, Persians and Tartars, hear!
Let there be truce between the hosts to-day.
But choose a champion from the Persian lords
To fight our champion Sohrab, man to man."
     As, in the country, on a morn in June,
When the dew glistens on the pearled ears,
So, when they heard what Peran-Wisa said,
A thrill through all the Tartar squadrons ran
Of pride and hope for Sohrab, whom they loved.
     But as a troop of pedlars, from Cabool,
Cross underneath the Indian Caucasus,
That vast sky-neighbouring mountain of milk snow;
Crossing so high, that, as they mount, they pass
Long flocks of travelling birds dead on the snow,
Choked by the air, and scarce can they themselves
In single file they move, and stop their breath,
So the pale Persians held their breath with fear.
     And to Ferood his brother chiefs came up
To counsel; Gudurz and Zoarrah came,
And Feraburz, who ruled the Persian host
Second, and was the uncle of the King;
     "Ferood, shame bids us take their challenge up,
Yet champion have we none to match this youth.
He has the wild stag's foot, the lion's heart.
But Rustum came last night; aloof he sits
And sullen, and has pitch'd his tents apart.
Him will I seek, and carry to his ear
The Tartar challenge, and this young man's name.
Haply he will forget his wrath, and fight.
Stand forth the while, and take their challenge up."
"Old man, be it agreed as thou hast said!
Let Sohrab arm, and we will find a man."
     He spake: and Peran-Wisa turn'd, and strode
How changed is here each spot man makes or fills!
     In the two Hinkseys nothing keeps the same;
          The village street its haunted mansion lacks,
     And from the sign is gone Sibylla's name,
               Are ye too changed, ye hills?
     See, 'tis no foot of unfamiliar men
          To-night from Oxford up your pathway strays!
     Thyrsis and I; we still had Thyrsis then.
Runs it not here, the track by Childsworth Farm,
     Past the high wood, to where the elm-tree crowns
          The hill behind whose ridge the sunset flames?
     The signal-elm, that looks on Ilsley Downs,
               This winter-eve is warm,
     Humid the air! leafless, yet soft as spring,
          The tender purple spray on copse and briers!
          And that sweet city with her dreaming spires,
     She needs not June for beauty's heightening,
     Only, methinks, some loss of habit's power
          Befalls me wandering through this upland dim.
     Once pass'd I blindfold here, at any hour;
          Now seldom come I, since I came with him.
               That single elm-tree bright
          We prized it dearly; while it stood, we said,
          Our friend, the Gipsy-Scholar, was not dead;
     While the tree lived, he in these fields lived on.
Too rare, too rare, grow now my visits here,
     But once I knew each field, each flower, each stick;
          And with the country-folk acquaintance made
     By barn in threshing-time, by new-built rick.
          Here, too, our shepherd-pipes we first assay'd.
               Ah me! this many a year
     My pipe is lost, my shepherd's holiday!
          Needs must I lose them, needs with heavy heart
          Into the world and wave of men depart;
     But Thyrsis of his own will went away.
It irk'd him to be here, he could not rest.
     He loved each simple joy the country yields,
          He loved his mates; but yet he could not keep,
     For that a shadow lour'd on the fields,
          Here with the shepherds and the silly sheep.
               Some life of men unblest
     He knew, which made him droop, and fill'd his head.
          He went; his piping took a troubled sound
          Of storms that rage outside our happy ground;
     He could not wait their passing, he is dead.
So, some tempestuous morn in early June,
     When the year's primal burst of bloom is o'er,
     When garden-walks and all the grassy floor
          With blossoms red and white of fallen May
     So have I heard the cuckoo's parting cry,
          From the wet field, through the vext garden-trees,
          Come with the volleying rain and tossing breeze:
The bloom is gone, and with the bloom go I! 
Too quick despairer, wherefore wilt thou go?
     Soon will the high Midsummer pomps come on,
          Soon will the musk carnations break and swell,
     Soon shall we have gold-dusted snapdragon,
          Sweet-William with his homely cottage-smell,
               And stocks in fragrant blow;
     Roses that down the alleys shine afar,
          And groups under the dreaming garden-trees,
     And the full moon, and the white evening-star.
He hearkens not! light comer, he is flown!
     What matters it? next year he will return,
          And we shall have him in the sweet spring-days,
     With whitening hedges, and uncrumpling fern,
          And blue-bells trembling by the forest-ways,
               And scent of hay new-mown.
     But Thyrsis never more we swains shall see;
          See him come back, and cut a smoother reed,
     For Time, not Corydon, hath conquer'd thee!
     But when Sicilian shepherds lost a mate,
          Some good survivor with his flute would go,
     Piping a ditty sad for Bion's fate;
          And cross the unpermitted ferry's flow,
               And relax Pluto's brow,
     And make leap up with joy the beauteous head
          Of Proserpine, among whose crowned hair
          Are flowers first open'd on Sicilian air,
     And flute his friend, like Orpheus, from the dead.
O easy access to the hearer's grace
     When Dorian shepherds sang to Proserpine!
          For she herself had trod Sicilian fields,
     She knew the Dorian water's gush divine,
          She knew each lily white which Enna yields
               Each rose with blushing face;
     She loved the Dorian pipe, the Dorian strain.
          But ah, of our poor Thames she never heard!
          Her foot the Cumner cowslips never stirr'd;
     And we should tease her with our plaint in vain!
     Well! wind-dispersed and vain the words will be,
          Yet, Thyrsis, let me give my grief its hour
          In the old haunt, and find our tree-topp'd hill!
     Who, if not I, for questing here hath power?
          I know the wood which hides the daffodil,
               I know the Fyfield tree,
     I know what white, what purple fritillaries
          The grassy harvest of the river-fields,
          Above by Ensham, down by Sandford, yields,
     And what sedged brooks are Thames's tributaries;
     But many a tingle on the loved hillside,
          With thorns once studded, old, white-blossom'd trees,
     Where thick the cowslips grew, and far descried
          High tower'd the spikes of purple orchises,
               Hath since our day put by
     The coronals of that forgotten time;
          Down each green bank hath gone the ploughboy's team,
          And only in the hidden brookside gleam
     Primroses, orphans of the flowery prime.
Where is the girl, who by the boatman's door,
     Above the locks, above the boating throng,
          Unmoor'd our skiff when through the Wytham flats,
     Red loosestrife and blond meadow-sweet among
          And darting swallows and light water-gnats,
               We track'd the shy Thames shore?
     Where are the mowers, who, as the tiny swell
          Of our boat passing heaved the river-grass,
     They all are gone, and thou art gone as well!
Yes, thou art gone! and round me too the night
     In ever-nearing circle weaves her shade.
          I see her veil draw soft across the day,
     I feel her slowly chilling breath invade
          The cheek grown thin, the brown hair sprent with grey;
               I feel her finger light
          The foot less prompt to meet the morning dew,
          The heart less bounding at emotion new,
     And hope, once crush'd, less quick to spring again.
And long the way appears, which seem'd so short
     To the less practised eye of sanguine youth;
          And high the mountain-tops, in cloudy air,
     The mountain-tops where is the throne of Truth,
          Tops in life's morning-sun so bright and bare!
               Unbreachable the fort
     Of the long-batter'd world uplifts its wall;
          And strange and vain the earthly turmoil grows,
          And near and real the charm of thy repose,
     And night as welcome as a friend would fall.
But hush! the upland hath a sudden loss
          A troop of Oxford hunters going home,
     As in old days, jovial and talking, ride!
          From hunting with the Berkshire hounds they come.
               Quick! let me fly, and cross
          Back'd by the sunset, which doth glorify
          The orange and pale violet evening-sky,
     Bare on its lonely ridge, the Tree! the Tree!
I take the omen! Eve lets down her veil,
     The white fog creeps from bush to bush about,
          The west unflushes, the high stars grow bright,
     And in the scatter'd farms the lights come out.
          I cannot reach the signal-tree to-night,
               Yet, happy omen, hail!
     Hear it from thy broad lucent Arno-vale
          (For there thine earth forgetting eyelids keep
          The morningless and unawakening sleep
     Under the flowery oleanders pale),
     Ah, vain! These English fields, this upland dim,
          These brambles pale with mist engarlanded,
     That lone, sky-pointing tree, are not for him;
          To a boon southern country he is fled,
               And now in happier air,
     Wandering with the great Mother's train divine
          (And purer or more subtle soul than thee,
          I trow, the mighty Mother doth not see)
     Within a folding of the Apennine,
     Putting his sickle to the perilous grain
          In the hot cornfield of the Phrygian king,
     For thee the Lityerses-song again
          Young Daphnis with his silver voice doth sing;
               Sings his Sicilian fold,
          And how a call celestial round him rang,
          And heavenward from the fountain-brink he sprang,
     And all the marvel of the golden skies.
There thou art gone, and me thou leavest here
     Sole in these fields! yet will I not despair.
          Despair I will not, while I yet descry
     'Neath the mild canopy of English air
          That lonely tree against the western sky.
               Still, still these slopes, 'tis clear,
     Our Gipsy-Scholar haunts, outliving thee!
          Fields where soft sheep from cages pull the hay,
          Woods with anemonies in flower till May,
     Know him a wanderer still; then why not me?
A fugitive and gracious light he seeks,
     Shy to illumine; and I seek it too.
          This does not come with houses or with gold,
     With place, with honour, and a flattering crew;
               But the smooth-slipping weeks
     Drop by, and leave its seeker still untired;
          Out of the heed of mortals he is gone,
          He wends unfollow'd, he must house alone;
     Yet on he fares, by his own heart inspired.
Thou too, O Thyrsis, on like quest wast bound;
     Thou wanderedst with me for a little hour!
          Men gave thee nothing; but this happy quest,
     If men esteem'd thee feeble, gave thee power,
          If men procured thee trouble, gave thee rest.
               And this rude Cumner ground,
     Its fir-topped Hurst, its farms, its quiet fields,
          Here cams't thou in thy jocund youthful time,
          Here was thine height of strength, thy golden prime!
     And still the haunt beloved a virtue yields.
What though the music of thy rustic flute
     Kept not for long its happy, country tone;
          Lost it too soon, and learnt a stormy note
     Of men contention-tost, of men who groan,
               It fail'd, and thou wage mute!
     Yet hadst thou always visions of our light,
          And long with men of care thou couldst not stay,
          And soon thy foot resumed its wandering way,
     Left human haunt, and on alone till night.
Too rare, too rare, grow now my visits here!
     'Mid city-noise, not, as with thee of yore,
          Thyrsis! in reach of sheep-bells is my home.
          Let in thy voice a whisper often come,
               To chase fatigue and fear:
Why faintest thou! I wander'd till I died.  
Roam on! The light we sought is shining still.  
Dost thou ask proof? Our tree yet crowns the hill,  
Our Scholar travels yet the loved hill-side. 

sed John you and Jan fighting?
Must be from the govament
or the insurance, I can understand that.
Did he die or summin?
You aint sed a decent word all morning
I might as well be working by myself
and let you set on the nailkeg
unrolling barbwore
Oh dammit, John,
about coyotes killing sheep
and he wrote saying that never happens.
He sez what? sez John.
that a coyote ever killed a sheep
unless it was rabid, I said.
And he said my story was a lie
and should never have been written.
What does he write about?
Oh, he writes novels, I said.
Books about cowboys and Indians
and the California mountains.
He sez that sed John
did he? You know
most chickens I known of
is layers and most folks
I known is liars
of their opinions.
It was a preacher
got his first call
to come to our town back home
his first sermon that everbody
showed up to hear
was how all people is good
it aint no such of a thing
as a bad person
before Travis Newberry
knocked up his daughter in the eighth grade
and he was twenty-four by then.
after giving up on farming
and owning a grocery store
must of been too late
he run out of words after bout a year
we had to elect him to office
to give him something to do.
First thing he voted no taxes
and no pay raises to schoolteachers
mebbe governor some day
had to move him out
of the parsonage and into a house
where he had to pay rent
like real people
so they found him a place
out on the end of town
where they could be alone
with that pregnant girl
they took out of school.
It was skunks out there
a mama and four babies
and his wife and that girl
let them alone we like them
so he did
by the time she had her baby
the Easter ducks and the cats
it was mice and skunks
running all over that place
so he run for state office
they sent that girl
off to Christian school
we never heard of her again
and tried to raise the baby boy
He got elected
to the campaign of no taxes
and close down the schools
cause he blamed it all
on Travis Newberry hanging around
the jr-high parking lot
and moved to the state capital
to live and before
they could rent that house again
they had to set out traps
for two months and rat poison
sed they got twenty-four skunks
but nobody counted the mice
it was awful
took a year for the smells
back then to rent it to
they had to wait it out
so he run for Warshington office
six years later
and put the boy in the orphanage
up for adoption
he might of been a scandal
they made him a judge instead
still there and being so famous
the state gave him a house
and a car and a maid
about people or skunks or mice
or preaching or farming or
running a grocery store.
I seen it with my own eyes
a coyote running through
a herd of sheep and killed nine lambs
just to do it
and we set up five nights
in our pickups waiting for him
until he come back
and he killed four more
before we shot him
Allen Dalley out to Summit lost
that one year when they say
coyotes got half his lamb crop
because he done one thing
about anothern
you tell him to just keep his mouth closed
or run for office
and you can forget him too for now
cause all this is real
not something in a book
and has to be got done for sure
not just by thinking about it
this is gone be a long day of work
A girl stalked a sheep in a field. The sheep began to bleed
& the whole field smelled like carnage.
A butcher had moved in and slaughtered the sheep.
Red, the stain on her dress. Empty, her basket. The depletion
In the vacated house, the girl tried to flush
the blood down the toilet but the infrastructure
The girl studied Islamic history, the origin
of arithmetic. The stain turned the girl into a lady
When she asked the spout for water, it rusted.
She grew cold. She grew weary. She grew sad.
If only she could ban the butcher in solidarity
with the bad children, the refugees and outcasts.
Instead she drove into the city, the urban sprawl
swallowing her. She went into a store, got caught stealing
a candy bar. Surveillance footage showed she had
no remorse. She justified: We all live on stolen
land. Why not one bar of chocolate, subsidized?
Then she remembered prisoners, their tombstones
unmarked. A cop arrested her, trapped
her in the back of the police van. Trillions
of atoms spinning inside her body, an unrealized
dystopia, blueprint of urban catastrophe.
The streets, without strangers, all barren.
The trees, without protection, all windswept.
MEan while the new-baptiz'd, who yet remain'd 
At Jordan with the Baptist, and had seen 
Him whom they heard so late expresly call'd 
Jesus Messiah Son of God declar'd, 
And on that high Authority had believ'd, 
And with him talkt, and with him lodg'd, I mean 
Andrew and Simon, famous after known 
With others though in Holy Writ not nam'd, 
Now missing him thir joy so lately found, 
So lately found, and so abruptly gone, 
Began to doubt, and doubted many days, 
And as the days increas'd, increas'd thir doubt: 
Sometimes they thought he might be only shewn, 
And for a time caught up to God, as once 
Moses was in the Mount, and missing long; 
And the great Thisbite who on fiery wheels 
Rode up to Heaven, yet once again to come. 
Therefore as those young Prophets then with care 
Sought lost Eliah, so in each place these 
Nigh to Bethabara; in Jerico 
On this side the broad lake Genezaret, 
Or in Perea, but return'd in vain. 
Then on the bank of Jordan, by a Creek: 
Where winds with Reeds, and Osiers whisp'ring play 
Plain Fishermen, no greater men them call, 
Close in a Cottage low together got 
Thir unexpected loss and plaints out breath'd. 
Alas, from what high hope to what relapse 
Unlook'd for are we fall'n, our eyes beheld 
Messiah certainly now come, so long 
Expected of our Fathers; we have heard 
His words, his wisdom full of grace and truth, 
Now, now, for sure, deliverance is at hand, 
The Kingdom shall to Israel be restor'd: 
Thus we rejoyc'd, but soon our joy is turn'd 
Into perplexity and new amaze: 
For whither is he gone, what accident 
Hath rapt him from us? will he now retire 
After appearance, and again prolong 
Send thy Messiah forth, the time is come; 
Behold the Kings of the Earth how they oppress 
Thy chosen, to what highth thir pow'r unjust 
They have exalted, and behind them cast 
All fear of thee, arise and vindicate 
Thy Glory, free thy people from thir yoke, 
But let us wait; thus far he hath perform'd, 
Sent his Anointed, and to us reveal'd him, 
By his great Prophet, pointed at and shown, 
In publick, and with him we have convers'd; 
Let us be glad of this, and all our fears 
Lay on his Providence; he will not fail 
Nor will withdraw him now, nor will recall, 
Mock us with his blest sight, then snatch him hence, 
Soon we shall see our hope, our joy return. 
To find whom at the first they found unsought: 
But to his Mother Mary, when she saw 
Others return'd from Baptism, not her Son, 
Nor left at Jordan, tydings of him none; 
Within her brest, though calm; her brest though pure, 
Motherly cares and fears got head, and rais'd 
Some troubl'd thoughts, which she in sighs thus clad. 
To have conceiv'd of God, or that salute 
Hale highly favour'd, among women blest; 
While I to sorrows am no less advanc't, 
And fears as eminent, above the lot 
Of other women, by the birth I bore, 
In such a season born when scarce a Shed 
Could be obtain'd to shelter him or me 
From the bleak air; a Stable was our warmth, 
A Manger his, yet soon enforc't to flye 
Thence into Egypt, till the Murd'rous King 
Were dead, who sought his life, and missing fill'd 
With Infant blood the streets of Bethlehem; 
From Egypt home return'd, in Nazareth 
Hath been our dwelling many years, his life 
Private, unactive, calm, contemplative, 
Little suspicious to any King; but now 
Full grown to Man, acknowledg'd, as I hear, 
By John the Baptist, and in publick shown, 
Son own'd from Heaven by his Father's voice; 
I look't for some great change; to Honour? no, 
But trouble, as old Simeon plain fore-told, 
That to the fall and rising he should be 
Of many in Israel, and to a sign 
Spoken against, that through my very Soul 
A sword shall pierce, this is my favour'd lot, 
My Exaltation to Afflictions high; 
Afflicted I may be, it seems, and blest; 
I will not argue that, nor will repine. 
But where delays he now? some great intent 
Conceals him: when twelve years he scarce had seen, 
I lost him, but so found, as well I saw 
He could not lose himself; but went about 
His Father's business; what he meant I mus'd, 
Since understand; much more his absence now 
Thus long to some great purpose he obscures. 
But I to wait with patience am inur'd; 
My heart hath been a store-house long of things 
And sayings laid up, portending strange events. 
Recalling what remarkably had pass'd 
Since first her Salutation heard, with thoughts 
Meekly compos'd awaited the fulfilling: 
The while her Son tracing the Desert wild, 
Sole but with holiest Meditations fed, 
Into himself descended, and at once 
All his great work to come before him set; 
How to begin, how to accomplish best 
His end of being on Earth, and mission high: 
For Satan with slye preface to return 
Had left him vacant, and with speed was gon 
Up to the middle Region of thick Air, 
Where all his Potentates in Council sate; 
There without sign of boast, or sign of joy, 
Sollicitous and blank he thus began. 
Demonian Spirits now, from the Element 
Each of his reign allotted, rightlier call'd, 
Powers of Fire, Air, Water, and Earth beneath, 
So may we hold our place and these mild seats 
Without new trouble; such an Enemy 
Is ris'n to invade us, who no less 
Threat'ns then our expulsion down to Hell; 
I, as I undertook, and with the vote 
Consenting in full frequence was impowr'd, 
Have found him, view'd him, tasted him, but find 
Far other labour to be undergon 
Then when I dealt with Adam first of Men, 
Though Adam by his Wives allurement fell, 
However to this Man inferior far, 
If he be Man by Mothers side at least, 
With more then humane gifts from Heaven adorn'd, 
Perfections absolute, Graces divine, 
And amplitude of mind to greatest Deeds. 
Therefore I am return'd, lest confidence 
Of my success with Eve in Paradise 
Deceive ye to perswasion over-sure 
Of like succeeding here; I summon all 
Rather to be in readiness, with hand 
Or counsel to assist; lest I who erst 
Thought none my equal, now be over-match'd. 
With clamour was assur'd thir utmost aid 
At his command; when from amidst them rose 
Belial the dissolutest Spirit that fell, 
The sensuallest, and after Asmodai 
The fleshliest Incubus, and thus advis'd. 
Among daughters of men the fairest found; 
Many are in each Region passing fair 
As the noon Skie; more like to Goddesses 
Then Mortal Creatures, graceful and discreet, 
Expert in amorous Arts, enchanting tongues 
Perswasive, Virgin majesty with mild 
And sweet allay'd, yet terrible to approach, 
Skill'd to retire, and in retiring draw 
Hearts after them tangl'd in Amorous Nets. 
Such object hath the power to soft'n and tame 
Severest temper, smooth the rugged'st brow, 
Enerve, and with voluptuous hope dissolve, 
Draw out with credulous desire, and lead 
At will the manliest, resolutest brest, 
As the Magnetic hardest Iron draws. 
Women, when nothing else, beguil'd the heart 
Of wisest Solomon, and made him build, 
And made him bow to the Gods of his Wives. 
Belial, in much uneven scale thou weigh'st 
All others by thy self; because of old 
Thou thy self doat'st on womankind, admiring 
Thir shape, thir colour, and attractive grace, 
None are, thou think'st, but taken with such toys. 
Before the Flood thou with thy lusty Crew, 
False titl'd Sons of God, roaming the Earth 
Cast wanton eyes on the daughters of men, 
And coupl'd with them, and begot a race. 
Have we not seen, or by relation heard, 
In Courts and Regal Chambers how thou lurk'st, 
In Wood or Grove by mossie Fountain side, 
In Valley or Green Meadow to way-lay 
Some beauty rare, Calisto, Clymene, 
Daphne, or Semele, Antiopa, 
Or Amymone, Syrinx, many more 
Too long, then lay'st thy scapes on names ador'd, 
Apollo, Neptune, Jupiter, or Pan, 
Delight not all; among the Sons of Men, 
How many have with a smile made small account 
Of beauty and her lures, easily scorn'd 
All her assaults, on worthier things intent? 
Remember that Pellean Conquerour, 
A youth, how all the Beauties of the East 
He slightly view'd, and slightly over-pass'd; 
How hee sirnam'd of Africa dismiss'd 
In his prime youth the fair Iberian maid. 
For Solomon he liv'd at ease, and full 
DORINDA 
When death shall part us from these kids, 
And shut up our divided lids, 
Tell me, Thyrsis, prithee do, 
Whither thou and I must go. 
THYRSIS 
To the Elysium. 
DORINDA 
THYRSIS 
DORINDA 
I know no way but to our home, 
Is our cell Elysium? 
THYRSIS 
Turn thine eye to yonder sky, 
There the milky way doth lie; 
That leads to everlasting day. 
DORINDA 
There birds may nest, but how can I 
That have no wings and cannot fly? 
THYRSIS 
Do not sigh, fair nymph, for fire 
Hath no wings yet doth aspire 
Till it hit against the Pole: 
DORINDA 
But in Elysium how do they 
Pass eternity away? 
THYRSIS 
No need of dog to fetch our stray, 
Our Lightfoot we may give away; 
May sleep with music of the spheres. 
DORINDA 
Oh sweet! Oh sweet! How I my future state 
By silent thinking antedate: 
I prithee let us spend our time to come 
In talking of Elysium. 
THYRSIS 
Of sweetest grass and softest wool; 
There birds sing consorts, garlands grow, 
Cool winds do whisper, springs do flow. 
There always is a rising sun, 
And day is ever but begun. 
Shepherds there bear equal sway, 
DORINDA 
Ah me, ah me! 

THYRSIS 
DORINDA 
Convince me now that this is true 
By bidding with me all adieu. 
THYRSIS 
I cannot live without thee, I, 
CHORUS 
So shall we smoothly pass away in sleep.
When biting Boreas, fell and doure, 
Sharp shivers thro' the leafless bow'r; 
When Phoebus gies a short-liv'd glow'r, 
Dim-dark'ning thro' the flaky show'r, 
Ae night the storm the steeples rocked, 
Poor Labour sweet in sleep was locked, 
While burns, wi' snawy wreeths upchoked, 
Or thro' the mining outlet bocked, 
List'ning, the doors an' winnocks rattle, 
I thought me on the ourie cattle, 
Or silly sheep, wha bide this brattle 
And thro' the drift, deep-lairing, sprattle, 
Ilk happing bird, wee, helpless thing! 
That, in the merry months o' spring, 
Delighted me to hear thee sing, 
Whare wilt thou cow'r thy chittering wing 
Ev'n you on murd'ring errands toil'd, 
Lone from your savage homes exil'd, 
The blood-stain'd roost, and sheep-cote spoil'd 
While pityless the tempest wild 
Gilgamesh spoke and said to the old man then:
"When I looked at you I thought that you were not
a man, one made like me; I had resolved
to challenge you as one might challenge a demon,
a stranger-adversary. But now I see
that you are Utnapishtim, made like me,
a man, the one I sought, the one from whom
I might find out how death can be avoided.
Tell me then, father, how it came about
that you were admitted to the company
of gods, who granted you eternal life."
The father Utnapishtim spoke and said:
"I will tell Gilgamesh the king the story;
a secret of the gods I will disclose.

god-favored, on the banks of the Euphrates.
The gods in heaven decided in their council
to bring the flood down on the fortunate city.
They sat in secret council together, deciding.
Anu was there, the councilor Enlil,
Ninurta of the Silence, and there also
And there was Ea, cleverest of the gods.
The voice of Ea telling me the secret
came whispering through the reed walls of my house:
'You reed house walls, listen and hear me whisper;
listen and be attentive to what I tell you.
Utnapishtim, son of Ubartutu,
abandon your house, abandon what you possess,
abandon your house and build a boat instead.
Seek life instead of riches, save yourself.
Take with you, on the boat you build, an instance
of each thing living so that they may be
safe from obliteration in the flood.
Perform the construction of the boat with care.
Let the length of the boat and the width of the boat be equal.
Roof over the boat as the abyss is roofed.'
The whispering voice spoke through the rustling walls:
You reed house walls, listen and hear what I say.'
I listened and heard and spoke to the whispering voice:
'I hear what you say. What will I tell the others?
What will I tell the old men and the people?'
Ea the god whispered to me, his servant:
'Tell them you can no longer live in the city,
because you are out of favor with Enlil.
The city is the city of Enlil,
and therefore Utnapishtim, whom he hates,
must find another domicile and another
god who will be his patron and protector,
and you have therefore decided to depart
from Shuruppak and seek another home.
Tell them Ea the god will be your patron,
whose domicile is Apsu the abyss.
Under the roof of Apsu is where you go.
As for the city, fortunate Shuruppak,
in the morning dawning, abundance will then rain down:
there will be plenty, a flood of bounty, the city
teeming with heaven's profusion, game birds falling,
fishes unheard-of before in song or story,
tumbling loaves of fresh-baked morning bread;
grain will come showering in from all the grain fields;
a harvest of everything, yes, more than enough.
These are the things to tell the elders and people.'

"In the first hours of the early morning dawning,
all the people came out for the boat-building,
the little children, the weak as well as the strong,
everyone carrying something: asphalt, and oil,
and pitch, the best of timber with which to build.
Day after day I labored building the boat.
Ten times a dozen cubits were the walls;
ten times a dozen cubits was each deck.
There were six decks; the cabin was divided
into nine compartments. I made up the plans;
I drew a picture of them for our guidance.
I hammered the boat together, and plugged the holes
with water plugs to keep the water out.
I made the bitumen pitch in the pitch kiln,
three sar of bitumen pitch to caulk the hull
and, to be certain, three sar to caulk the inside.
I counted punting poles and put them aboard;
I had the basket bearers stow the supplies
of oil and foodstuffs, everything I needed.
As for the people who came to help in the work
each day was like a New Year's holiday:
I slaughtered sheep and bullocks for their feasting;
as if there was a river overflowing.
On the seventh day I finished building the boat.
I opened a bowl of ointment for my hands.
I commanded the loading of everything I owned
that could be carried, silver, and gold, and all
the instances of living things to be
saved from obliteration in the flood;
and all my household people I took with me.
At sunset on that day I launched the boat.
The launching was very hard to manage. It took
much shifting and much maneuvering on the ways
to get the unwieldy boat down into the river,
and two-thirds of its weight under the water
in order to prevent it from capsizing.
As darkness was coming on I heard the god:
'Abundance will rain down, more than enough!
Get yourself inside, and close the hatch!'
I saw the signs of morning in the sky.
'Abundance will rain down, more than enough!'
I got myself inside, and closed the hatch.
To Puzuramurri the caulker, who, outside,
caulked up the hatch with pitch, I gave my house.

"In the early hours of the next morning dawning
there was the noise of Adad in the clouds
that rose and filled the morning sky with blackness.
Shullat the herald of the dread Adad
moved out over the mountains and over the valleys,
bellowing; Hanish the herald of the dread
Adad moved over the plains and over the cities;
everything turned to darkness as to night.
From time to time the Annunaki blazed
Beneath, the god of the Underworld, Nergal,
broke down his own doorposts and opened the earth.
Ninurta god of chaos and of war
opened the dikes, and other floods burst forth.
The South Wind rushed in flooding over the mountains.
Brother could not see brother in the welter;
none of the gods in heaven could see the earth;
the land was shattered like a shattered pot;
confusions of dread Adad were everywhere.
Terrified gods got themselves up as high
Irish creamery butter as the waiter
and antimony, just lumpy roads
mirrors as day broke on Rosses.
the EEC on the horizon,
every summer.
in hand, waved me down.

marked red and blue looked like sweaters.
ships up here, and the Choctaws
We passed the rusted hulls
of floating mussel beds.

a place to write.
half roofless and cracked,
where the sky seemed lower than the rocks
of red sheep.
2
________________
Yet once more, O ye laurels, and once more 
Ye myrtles brown, with ivy never sere, 
I come to pluck your berries harsh and crude, 
And with forc'd fingers rude 
Shatter your leaves before the mellowing year. 
Bitter constraint and sad occasion dear 
Compels me to disturb your season due; 
For Lycidas is dead, dead ere his prime, 
Young Lycidas, and hath not left his peer. 
Who would not sing for Lycidas? he knew 
Himself to sing, and build the lofty rhyme. 
He must not float upon his wat'ry bier 
Unwept, and welter to the parching wind, 
Without the meed of some melodious tear. 
That from beneath the seat of Jove doth spring; 
Begin, and somewhat loudly sweep the string. 
Hence with denial vain and coy excuse! 
So may some gentle muse 
With lucky words favour my destin'd urn, 
And as he passes turn 
And bid fair peace be to my sable shroud! 
Fed the same flock, by fountain, shade, and rill; 
Together both, ere the high lawns appear'd 
Under the opening eyelids of the morn, 
We drove afield, and both together heard 
What time the gray-fly winds her sultry horn, 
Batt'ning our flocks with the fresh dews of night, 
Oft till the star that rose at ev'ning bright 
Toward heav'n's descent had slop'd his westering wheel. 
Meanwhile the rural ditties were not mute, 
Temper'd to th'oaten flute; 
Rough Satyrs danc'd, and Fauns with clov'n heel, 
From the glad sound would not be absent long; 
Now thou art gone, and never must return! 
Thee, Shepherd, thee the woods and desert caves, 
With wild thyme and the gadding vine o'ergrown, 
And all their echoes mourn. 
The willows and the hazel copses green 
Shall now no more be seen 
Fanning their joyous leaves to thy soft lays. 
As killing as the canker to the rose, 
Or taint-worm to the weanling herds that graze, 
Or frost to flowers that their gay wardrobe wear 
When first the white thorn blows: 
Such, Lycidas, thy loss to shepherd's ear. 
Clos'd o'er the head of your lov'd Lycidas? 
For neither were ye playing on the steep 
Where your old bards, the famous Druids, lie, 
Nor on the shaggy top of Mona high, 
Nor yet where Deva spreads her wizard stream. 
Ay me! I fondly dream 
What could the Muse herself that Orpheus bore, 
The Muse herself, for her enchanting son, 
Whom universal nature did lament, 
When by the rout that made the hideous roar 
His gory visage down the stream was sent, 
Down the swift Hebrus to the Lesbian shore? 
To tend the homely, slighted shepherd's trade, 
And strictly meditate the thankless Muse? 
Were it not better done, as others use, 
To sport with Amaryllis in the shade, 
Fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise 
(That last infirmity of noble mind) 
To scorn delights and live laborious days; 
But the fair guerdon when we hope to find, 
And think to burst out into sudden blaze, 
Comes the blind Fury with th'abhorred shears, 
And slits the thin-spun life. "But not the praise," 
Phoebus replied, and touch'd my trembling ears; 
"Fame is no plant that grows on mortal soil, 
Nor in the glistering foil 
Set off to th'world, nor in broad rumour lies, 
But lives and spreads aloft by those pure eyes 
And perfect witness of all-judging Jove; 
As he pronounces lastly on each deed, 
Of so much fame in Heav'n expect thy meed." 
Smooth-sliding Mincius, crown'd with vocal reeds, 
That strain I heard was of a higher mood. 
But now my oat proceeds, 
And listens to the Herald of the Sea, 
That came in Neptune's plea. 
He ask'd the waves, and ask'd the felon winds, 
"What hard mishap hath doom'd this gentle swain?" 
And question'd every gust of rugged wings 
That blows from off each beaked promontory. 
They knew not of his story; 
And sage Hippotades their answer brings, 
That not a blast was from his dungeon stray'd; 
The air was calm, and on the level brine 
Sleek Panope with all her sisters play'd. 
It was that fatal and perfidious bark, 
Built in th'eclipse, and rigg'd with curses dark, 
That sunk so low that sacred head of thine. 
His mantle hairy, and his bonnet sedge, 
Inwrought with figures dim, and on the edge 
Like to that sanguine flower inscrib'd with woe. 
"Ah! who hath reft," quoth he, "my dearest pledge?" 
Last came, and last did go, 
The Pilot of the Galilean lake; 
Two massy keys he bore of metals twain 
(The golden opes, the iron shuts amain). 
He shook his mitred locks, and stern bespake: 
"How well could I have spar'd for thee, young swain, 
Enow of such as for their bellies' sake 
Creep and intrude, and climb into the fold? 
Of other care they little reck'ning make 
Than how to scramble at the shearers' feast 
And shove away the worthy bidden guest. 
Blind mouths! that scarce themselves know how to hold 
A sheep-hook, or have learn'd aught else the least 
That to the faithful herdman's art belongs! 
What recks it them? What need they? They are sped; 
And when they list their lean and flashy songs 
Grate on their scrannel pipes of wretched straw, 
The hungry sheep look up, and are not fed, 
But, swoll'n with wind and the rank mist they draw, 
Rot inwardly, and foul contagion spread; 
Besides what the grim wolf with privy paw 
Daily devours apace, and nothing said, 
But that two-handed engine at the door 
Stands ready to smite once, and smite no more". 
That shrunk thy streams; return, Sicilian Muse, 
And call the vales and bid them hither cast 
Their bells and flow'rets of a thousand hues. 
Ye valleys low, where the mild whispers use 
Of shades and wanton winds, and gushing brooks, 
On whose fresh lap the swart star sparely looks, 
Throw hither all your quaint enamel'd eyes, 
That on the green turf suck the honied showers 
And purple all the ground with vernal flowers. 
Bring the rathe primrose that forsaken dies, 
The tufted crow-toe, and pale jessamine, 
The white pink, and the pansy freak'd with jet, 
The glowing violet, 
The musk-rose, and the well attir'd woodbine, 
With cowslips wan that hang the pensive head, 
And every flower that sad embroidery wears; 
Bid amaranthus all his beauty shed, 
And daffadillies fill their cups with tears, 
To strew the laureate hearse where Lycid lies. 
For so to interpose a little ease, 
Let our frail thoughts dally with false surmise. 
Ay me! Whilst thee the shores and sounding seas 
Wash far away, where'er thy bones are hurl'd; 
Whether beyond the stormy Hebrides, 
Where thou perhaps under the whelming tide 
Visit'st the bottom of the monstrous world, 
Or whether thou, to our moist vows denied, 
Sleep'st by the fable of Bellerus old, 
Where the great vision of the guarded mount 
Looks toward Namancos and Bayona's hold: 
Look homeward Angel now, and melt with ruth; 
And, O ye dolphins, waft the hapless youth. 
For Lycidas, your sorrow, is not dead, 
Sunk though he be beneath the wat'ry floor; 
So sinks the day-star in the ocean bed, 
And yet anon repairs his drooping head, 
And tricks his beams, and with new spangled ore 
Flames in the forehead of the morning sky: 
So Lycidas sunk low, but mounted high 
Through the dear might of him that walk'd the waves; 
Where, other groves and other streams along, 
With nectar pure his oozy locks he laves, 
And hears the unexpressive nuptial song, 
In the blest kingdoms meek of joy and love. 
There entertain him all the Saints above, 
In solemn troops, and sweet societies, 
That sing, and singing in their glory move, 
And wipe the tears for ever from his eyes. 
Now, Lycidas, the shepherds weep no more: 
Henceforth thou art the Genius of the shore, 
In thy large recompense, and shalt be good 
To all that wander in that perilous flood. 
While the still morn went out with sandals gray; 
He touch'd the tender stops of various quills, 
With eager thought warbling his Doric lay; 
And now the sun had stretch'd out all the hills, 
And now was dropp'd into the western bay; 
At last he rose, and twitch'd his mantle blue: 
To-morrow to fresh woods, and pastures new. 

Now swarthy Summer, by rude health embrowned,
    Precedence takes of rosy fingered Spring;
And laughing Joy, with wild flowers prank'd, and crown'd,
    A wild and giddy thing,
And Health robust, from every care unbound,
    Come on the zephyr's wing,
      And cheer the toiling clown.
  Happy as holiday-enjoying face,
    Loud tongued, and "merry as a marriage bell,"
Thy lightsome step sheds joy in every place;
    And where the troubled dwell,
Thy witching charms wean them of half their cares;
    And from thy sunny spell,
      They greet joy unawares.
  Then with thy sultry locks all loose and rude,
    And mantle laced with gems of garish light,
Come as of wont; for I would fain intrude,
    And in the world's despite,
Share the rude wealth that thy own heart beguiles;
    If haply so I might
      Win pleasure from thy smiles.
  Me not the noise of brawling pleasure cheers,
    In nightly revels or in city streets;
But joys which soothe, and not distract the ears,
    That one at leisure meets
In the green woods, and meadows summer-shorn,
    Or fields, where bee-fly greets
      The ear with mellow horn.
  The green-swathed grasshopper, on treble pipe,
    Sings there, and dances, in mad-hearted pranks;
There bees go courting every flower that's ripe,
    On baulks and sunny banks;
And droning dragon-fly, on rude bassoon,
    Attempts to give God thanks
      In no discordant tune.
  The speckled thrush, by self-delight embued,
    There sings unto himself for joy's amends,
And drinks the honey dew of solitude.
    There Happiness attends
With inbred Joy until the heart o'erflow,
    Of which the world's rude friends,
      Nought heeding, nothing know.
  There the gay river, laughing as it goes,
    Plashes with easy wave its flaggy sides,
And to the calm of heart, in calmness shows
    What pleasure there abides,
To trace its sedgy banks, from trouble free:
    Spots Solitude provides
      To muse, and happy be.
  There ruminating 'neath some pleasant bush,
    On sweet silk grass I stretch me at mine ease,
Where I can pillow on the yielding rush;
    And, acting as I please,
Drop into pleasant dreams; or musing lie,
    Mark the wind-shaken trees,
      And cloud-betravelled sky.
  There think me how some barter joy for care,
    And waste life's summer-health in riot rude,
Of nature, nor of nature's sweets aware.
    When passions vain intrude,
These, by calm musings, softened are and still;
    And the heart's better mood
      Feels sick of doing ill.
  There I can live, and at my leisure seek
Free as the winds, that breathe upon my cheek
    Rude health, so long denied.
Here poor Integrity can sit at ease,
    And list self-satisfied
      The song of honey-bees.
  The green lane now I traverse, where it goes
    Nought guessing, till some sudden turn espies
Rude batter'd finger post, that stooping shows
    Where the snug mystery lies;
And then a mossy spire, with ivy crown,
    Cheers up the short surprise,
      And shows a peeping town.
  I see the wild flowers, in their summer morn
    Of beauty, feeding on joy's luscious hours;
The gay convolvulus, wreathing round the thorn,
    Agape for honey showers;
And slender kingcup, burnished with the dew
    Of morning's early hours,
      Like gold yminted new.
  And mark by rustic bridge, o'er shallow stream,
    Cow-tending boy, to toil unreconciled,
Absorbed as in some vagrant summer dream;
    Who now, in gestures wild,
Starts dancing to his shadow on the wall,
    Feeling self-gratified,
      Nor fearing human thrall.
  Or thread the sunny valley laced with streams,
    Or forests rude, and the o'ershadow'd brims
Of simple ponds, where idle shepherd dreams,
    Stretching his listless limbs;
Or trace hay-scented meadows, smooth and long,
    Where joy's wild impulse swims
      In one continued song.
  I love at early morn, from new mown swath,
    To see the startled frog his route pursue;
To mark while, leaping o'er the dripping path,
    His bright sides scatter dew,
The early lark that from its bustle flies,
    To hail his matin new;
      And watch him to the skies.
  To note on hedgerow baulks, in moisture sprent,
    The jetty snail creep from the mossy thorn,
With earnest heed, and tremulous intent,
    Frail brother of the morn,
That from the tiny bent's dew-misted leaves
    Withdraws his timid horn,
      And fearful vision weaves.
  Or swallow heed on smoke-tanned chimney top,
    Wont to be first unsealing Morning's eye,
Ere yet the bee hath gleaned one wayward drop
    Of honey on his thigh;
To see him seek morn's airy couch to sing,
    Until the golden sky
      Bepaint his russet wing.
  Or sauntering boy by tanning corn to spy,
    With clapping noise to startle birds away,
And hear him bawl to every passer by
    To know the hour of day;
While the uncradled breezes, fresh and strong,
    With waking blossoms play,
  I love the south-west wind, or low or loud,
    And not the less when sudden drops of rain
Moisten my glowing cheek from ebon cloud,
    Threatening soft showers again,
That over lands new ploughed and meadow grounds,
    Summer's sweet breath unchain,
      And wake harmonious sounds.
  Rich music breathes in Summer's every sound;
    And in her harmony of varied greens,
Woods, meadows, hedge-rows, corn-fields, all around
    Much beauty intervenes,
Filling with harmony the ear and eye;
    While o'er the mingling scenes
      Far spreads the laughing sky.
  See, how the wind-enamoured aspen leaves
    Turn up their silver lining to the sun!
And hark! the rustling noise, that oft deceives,
    And makes the sheep-boy run:
The sound so mimics fast-approaching showers,
    He thinks the rain's begun,
      And hastes to sheltering bowers.
  But now the evening curdles dank and grey,
    Changing her watchet hue for sombre weed;
And moping owls, to close the lids of day,
    On drowsy wing proceed;
While chickering crickets, tremulous and long,
    Light's farewell inly heed,
      And give it parting song.
  The pranking bat its flighty circlet makes;
    The glow-worm burnishes its lamp anew;
O'er meadows dew-besprent, the beetle wakes
    Inquiries ever new,
Teazing each passing ear with murmurs vain,
    As wanting to pursue
      His homeward path again.
  Hark! 'tis the melody of distant bells
    That on the wind with pleasing hum rebounds
By fitful starts, then musically swells
    O'er the dim stilly grounds;
While on the meadow-bridge the pausing boy
    Listens the mellow sounds,
      And hums in vacant joy.
  Now homeward-bound, the hedger bundles round
His leathern doublet leaves a rustling sound,
    Till silly sheep beside
His path start tremulous, and once again
    Look back dissatisfied,
      And scour the dewy plain.
  How sweet the soothing calmness that distills
    O'er the heart's every sense its opiate dews,
In meek-eyed moods and ever balmy trills!
    That softens and subdues,
With gentle Quiet's bland and sober train,
    Which dreamy eve renews
      In many a mellow strain!
  I love to walk the fields, they are to me
    A legacy no evil can destroy;
They, like a spell, set every rapture free
    That cheer'd me when a boy.
    Comes like a new-born joy,
      To greet me in the field.
  For Nature's objects ever harmonize
    With emulous Taste, that vulgar deed annoys;
Which loves in pensive moods to sympathize,
    And meet vibrating joys
O'er Nature's pleasing things; nor slighting, deems
    Pastimes, the Muse employs,
      Vain and obtrusive themes.

After her pills the girl slept and counted
Pellet on pellet the regress of life.
Dead to the world, the world's count yet counted
Pellet on pill the antinomies of life.
Refused to turn, the way's back, she counted
Her several stones across the mire of life.
And stones away and sticks away she counted
To keep herself out of the country of life.
Lost tally. How the sheep return to home
Is the story she will retrieve
And the only story believe
Of one and one the sheep returning home
To take the shapes of life,
Coming and being counted.
Arabian ostrich; Long-eared kit fox; Mysterious starling. 
Great auk; Dodo; Eastern wapiti; Badlands bighorn sheep.  
Sea turtle; Cape lion; Heath hen; Raiatea thrush. 
Eastern harbor seal ; Ceylon elephant ; Great Indian rhinoceros.  
Before the curtain falls.

The mountain sheep are sweeter,
But the valley sheep are fatter;
We therefore deemed it meeter
To carry off the latter.
We made an expedition;
We met a host, and quelled it;
We forced a strong position,
And killed the men who held it.
On Dyfed's richest valley,
Where herds of kine were browsing,
We made a mighty sally,
To furnish our carousing.
Fierce warriors rushed to meet us;
We met them, and o'erthrew them:
They struggled hard to beat us;
But we conquered them, and slew them.
As we drove our prize at leisure,
The king marched forth to catch us:
His rage surpassed all measure,
But his people could not match us.
He fled to his hall-pillars;
And, ere our force we led off,
Some sacked his house and cellars,
While others cut his head off.
We there, in strife bewild'ring,
Spilt blood enough to swim in:
We orphaned many children,
And widowed many women.
The eagles and the ravens
We glutted with our foemen;
The heroes and the cravens,
The spearmen and the bowmen.
We brought away from battle,
And much their land bemoaned them,
Two thousand head of cattle,
And the head of him who owned them:
Ednyfed, king of Dyfed,
His head was borne before us;
His wine and beasts supplied our feasts,
And his overthrow, our chorus.
[Version 1: 1921]
The quick sparks on the gorse bushes are leaping,
Little jets of sunlight-texture imitating flame;
Above them, exultant, the peewits are sweeping:
They are lords of the desolate wastes of sadness their screamings proclaim.
Rabbits, handfuls of brown earth, lie
Low-rounded on the mournful grass they have bitten down to the quick.
Move my arms the hill bursts and heaves under their spurting kick.
The common flaunts bravely; but below, from the rushes
Crowds of glittering king-cups surge to challenge the blossoming bushes;
There the lazy streamlet pushes
Its curious course mildly; here it wakes again, leaps, laughs, and gushes.
Into a deep pond, an old sheep-dip,
Dark, overgrown with willows, cool, with the brook ebbing through so slow,
Naked on the steep, soft lip
Of the bank I stand watching my own white shadow quivering to and fro.
What if the gorse flowers shrivelled and kissing were lost?
Without the pulsing waters, where were the marigolds and the songs of the brook!
If my veins and my breasts with love embossed
Withered, my insolent soul would be gone like flowers that the hot wind took.
So my soul like a passionate woman turns,
Filled with remorseful terror to the man she scorned, and her love
For myself in my own eyes' laughter burns,
Runs ecstatic over the pliant folds rippling down to my belly from the breast-lights above.
Over my sunlit skin the warm, clinging air,
Rich with the songs of seven larks singing at once, goes kissing me glad.
And the soul of the wind and my blood compare
Their wandering happiness, and the wind, wasted in liberty, drifts on and is sad.
Oh but the water loves me and folds me,
Plays with me, sways me, lifts me and sinks me as though it were living blood,
Blood of a heaving woman who holds me,
Owning my supple body a rare glad thing, supremely good.
[Version 2: 1928]
The quick sparks on the gorse-bushes are leaping
Little jets of sunlight texture imitating flame;
Above them, exultant, the peewits are sweeping:
They have triumphed again o'er the ages, their screamings proclaim.
Rabbits, handfuls of brown earth, lie
Low-rounded on the mournful turf they have bitten down to the quick.
Lift my arms, the hill bursts and heaves under their spurting kick!
The common flaunts bravely; but below, from the rushes
Crowds of glittering king-cups surge to challenge the blossoming bushes;
There the lazy streamlet pushes
His bent course mildly; here wakes again, leaps, laughs, and gushes
Into a deep pond, an old sheep-dip,
Dark, overgrown with willows, cool, with the brook ebbing through so slow;
Naked on the steep, soft lip
Of the turf I stand watching my own white shadow quivering to and fro.
What if the gorse-flowers shrivelled, and I were gone?
What if the waters ceased, where were the marigolds then, and the gudgeon?
What is this thing that I look down upon?
White on the water wimples my shadow, strains like a dog on a string, to run on.
How it looks back, like a white dog to its master!
I on the bank all substance, my shadow all shadow looking up to me, looking back!
And the water runs, and runs faster, runs faster,
And the white dog dances and quivers, I am holding his cord quite slack.
But how splendid it is to be substance, here!
My shadow is neither here nor there; but I, I am royally here!
I am here! I am here! screams the peewit; the may-blobs burst out in a laugh as they hear!
Here! flick the rabbits. Here! pants the gorse. Here! say the insects far and near.
Over my skin in the sunshine, the warm, clinging air
Flushed with the songs of seven larks singing at once, goes kissing me glad.
You are here! You are here! We have found you! Everywhere
We sought you substantial, you touchstone of caresses, you naked lad!
Oh but the water loves me and folds me,
Plays with me, sways me, lifts me and sinks me, murmurs: Oh marvellous stuff!
Close, and it rolls me, enfolds me, touches me, as if never it could touch me enough.
Sun, but in substance, yellow water-blobs!
Wings and feathers on the crying, mysterious ages, peewits wheeling!
All that is right, all that is good; all that is God takes substance! a rabbit lobs
In confirmation, I hear sevenfold lark-songs pealing.

SPRING, COAST RANGE
The circle of white ash widens around it.
It is April; the shad, the hot headed fish,
And plate the surface like scales.
Twenty years ago the spreading gully
Six lonely, ominous fenceposts;
Over the deep waterless creek bed;
The hills are covered with wild oats
Dry and white by midsummer.
In a patch of moonlight a mole
Shakes his tunnel like an angry vein;
Leo crouches under the zenith.
As the wind dies down their fragrance
Clusters around them like thick smoke.
They are silent and immaculate.

I have seen its light over the warm sea,
And the living light in the water
Shivering away from the swimming hand,
Creeping against the lips, filling the floating hair.
The stone is clean as light, the light steady as stone.
The glacier contracts and turns grayer,
The stars change places.
Where it disappears again in the snow.
That pounds in the ears like ether;
The white snow breaks at the edge of it;
Of someone kissed in sleep.
To the young, sticky, wrinkled aspen leaves,
To the first violets and wild cyclamen,
And cook supper in the blue twilight.
At the edge of the snow.

Of the Sierra crest southward to Guatemala.
Over the face of the glacier.
The Great Bear kneels on the mountain.
Ten degrees below the moon
Venus sets in the haze arising from the Great Valley.
The east face of the mountain above me
Is lit with far off lightnings and the sky
It is storming in the White Mountains,
On the arid fourteen-thousand-foot peaks;
Rain is falling on the narrow gray ranges
Gleaming like a grape cluster of metal,
Moves over the Sierra crest and grows down the westward slope.
Frost, the color and quality of the cloud,
Lies over all the marsh below my campsite.
Only their shadows are really visible.
The lake is immobile and holds the stars
All night the eyes of deer shine for an instant
As they cross the radius of my firelight.
1.
That woman still lives at her ranch.
You can ask her. Maybe
She knows. As near and far
As the rest of us can tell
The barn and sheds were built
In the Great Depression. Someone
Had money and a big idea.
Far and away the biggest
A hundred men, shepherds
And shearers, working there.
That not only is, but seems,
Larger inside than out,
Like a planetarium or an orange,
Even with Wyoming around it,
And real stars flying away.
Just stick your head in there;
Its dark will make you dizzy.
It has an underneath
Too low to stand in unless
You are a sheep. The loft
Vaults like a dusky church.

All that summer
I balanced water,
Coaxing the desert
Into pasture,
With eight cubic feet
Per second for two
Thousand acres.
Horseback, shovel
On my shoulder along
Miles of ditches:
Stalling here,
Releasing there,
Water over
The deepening green,
Keeping it living:
Herons and cranes
Regal in meadows,
Strings of ducklings
Frothing the ditch
To get away.

One day riding ditches I saw Clay.
He was on the hill against the sky,
Flapping his arms at me.
They were going to bulldoze the corrals at the shearing sheds,
Intricate maze of gates and pens
Clay, as a kid, had built with his father,
Before they lost their ranch, before Frank died,
Before the family had to move away.
The new owner was razing everything.
I guess he had some kind of idea.
I met them at the shearing sheds.
Pat held a wrecking bar like a steel snake.
he said, looking shy.
Hell is when you know where you are.

On the barn roof a loose piece of tin
Flaps in the wind like a broken wing.
Wyoming whirls in the sun.
Up in the loft a pair of shears,
Oh, fifty or sixty years forgotten there,
Floats in noonlight, bearing up some dust,
Just a pair of spring-steel scissors,
Two knives joined at the hip, with smiling edges.
An owl the color of things left alone
Flaps out of the gable door.
Hell is when you know where you are:
Mazes of pens and gates dreaming sheep;
Miles of ditches dreaming green.

No one living knows
Who built the shearing sheds,
Unless maybe that woman,
Ever since she tried
To stab her husband with a pair of scissors.
He was ninety-one
And barely held her off.
Later she claimed she was just
Trying to cut his heart
Medication out of his shirt
And the old man had to leave
They bulldozed the corrals.
We got forty gates.
We took them someplace safe.

Now the vast, dim barn floats like an ocean liner
Whose doldrums are meadows spinning into brush,
And everywhere you look Wyoming hurries off.
All night the stars make their escape.
In the loft a pair of shears cuts woolly moonlight.
All day a piece of roofing slaps in the wind.
A startled owl flaps out of the gable.
You saved the gates for nothing.
You balanced the water to keep the green from spinning
Away into sage, the same gray as the wing
That just now shaded your eyes.
Ominous inscrutable Chinese news 
to get just before Christmas, 
considering my reasonable health, 
marriage spicy as moo-goo-gai-pan, 
career running like a not-too-old Chevrolet. 
Not bad, considering what can go wrong: 
the bony finger of Uncle Sam 
might point out my husband, 
my own national guard, 
and set him in Afghanistan; 
my boss could take a personal interest; 
the pain in my left knee could spread to my right. 
Still, as the old year tips into the new, 
I insist on the infant hope, gooing and kicking 
his legs in the air. I won't give in 
to the dark, the sub-zero weather, the fog, 
or even the neighbors' Nativity. 
Their four-year-old has arranged 
his whole legion of dinosaurs 
so they, too, worship the child, 
joining the cow and sheep. Or else, 
ultimate mortals, they've come to eat 
ox and camel, Mary and Joseph, 
then savor the newborn babe.
Sleep is 20
insignificant flamenco dancer
in Granada
important as you watched
the mountain ridge
What an idiotic number!
Sleep is twenty
under the cold crest of Sierra Nevada
while I go droning away at my dream life
Each episode is important
the theatre of the active
the critics are surely there
even the actors
even the flowers presented onstage
even the wild flowers
picked by the wife of the goatherd
each morning early (while I sleep)
under the snow cone
of Sierra Nevada

flowers clicking twenty times
because they like to repeat themselves
as I do as does the morning
or the drama one hopes
will be acted many times
As even these dreams in similar

In icy fields.
Is water flowing in the tank?
Will they huddle together, warm bodies pressing?
(Is it the year of the goat or the sheep?
Scholars debating Chinese zodiac,
follower or leader.)
O lead them to a warm corner,
little ones toward bulkier bodies.
Lead them to the brush, which cuts the icy wind.

who lives by herself on the ranch of goats,
far from here near the town of Ozona.

I. Separation Precedes Meeting
 The cat so close
 to the fire
 I smell scorched 
 breath. Parents,
 silent, behind me,
 a feeling of
 trees that might fall.
 Or dogs. 
 like trying
 to remember,
 is a movement
 of the whole body.
 You follow the 
 fog
 into more fog.
 Maybe the door ahead
 divides
 the facts
 from natural affection. How
 can I know. I meet
 too many
 in every mirror.
2.
 When I was little,
 was I I?
 My sister? A wolf
 chained,
 smothered in green virtues? 
 time
 of memory. Once
 I lie
 down on it
 with my whole body.
 Goethe quotations, warm
 sand, a smell of hay,
 long afternoons.
 would take a road
 would turn, with space,
 in on itself,
 would turn
 occasion into offer.

3.
 For days I hold
 a tiny landscape between
 thumb
 and index:
 sand,
 heather,
 shimmer of blue between pines.
 No smell: matchbook.
 Sand as schematic as
 into memory,
 down,
 with my blood,
 to the accretions
 in the arteries,
 to be read with the whole
 body, in the chambers
 of the heart.
 The light: of the match,
 struck,
 at last.
4.
 Concentration: a frown
 remember. Too many
 pasts
 recede
 in all directions.
 Slow movement into 
 Black beetles at night. A smell
 of sweat.
 how much my father used to eat.
 Place thick with smoke.
 Cards. Beer foaming over
 on the table.
 some guy said I ought
 to get married,
 put a pillow behind my eyes
 and, with a knowing
 sigh, spat
 in my lap.
5.
 The present.
 As difficult as
 the past, once a place
 curves into
 Castles in sand.
 Or Spain. Space
 of another language.
 is a body of water.
 You follow your lips
 into its softness. Far down
 the head finds its level
6. Tropisms
 Inward, always. Night
 curls the clover leaf
 around its sleep.
 Tightly.
 The bodies of the just
 roll,
 all night,
 through subterranean caves
 which turn 
 in on themselves.
 tunnel
 of forgetting. Need
 of blur. The air,
 large, curves
 its whole body.
 Big hammering waves
 flatten my 
 muscles.
 Inward, the distances: male
 and female fields,
 rigorously equal.
7.
 The drunk fell toward me
 in the street. I hope
 disappointed. Skinned
 his sleep.
 And a smell of snow. Quite normal,
 says the landlord, the master
 of rubbish, smaller
 and smaller in my 
 curved mirror.
 controllable
 good luck: my sleep
 always turns dense
 and visible. There
 are many witches
 in Germany. Their songs
 descend in steady half-tones
 through you.
8.
 following endless rows
 of sheep into your
 even breath.
 like Mozart, a living
 kind of air,
 keeps the dream
 spinning
 around itself, its
 missing core.
 Image
 after image of pleasure
 of the whole body
 deepens 
my sleep:
 fins. 
9. Introducing Decimals
 A dream, like trying 
 to remember, breaks open words
 for other,
 hidden meanings. The grass
 pales by degrees, twigs
 quaver glassily,
 ice
 flowers the window.
 Intimate equations more complicated
 than the coordinates of past
 and Germany. The cat
 its leg longer and longer
 with effort.
 A crying fit 
 is cancelled. An aria jelled
 in the larynx.
 Nothing moves in the cotton
 coma: only Descartes
 pinches himself
 an every fraction 
 must be solved.
THus they in lowliest plight repentant stood 
Praying, for from the Mercie-seat above 
Prevenient Grace descending had remov'd 
The stonie from thir hearts, & made new flesh 
Regenerate grow instead, that sighs now breath'd 
Unutterable, which the Spirit of prayer 
Inspir'd, and wing'd for Heav'n with speedier flight 
Then loudest Oratorie: yet thir port 
Not of mean suiters, nor important less 
Seem'd thir Petition, then when th' ancient Pair 
In Fables old, less ancient yet then these, 
Deucalion and chaste Pyrrha to restore 
The Race of Mankind drownd, before the Shrine 
Of Themis stood devout. To Heav'n thir prayers 
Flew up, nor missd the way, by envious windes 
Blown vagabond or frustrate: in they passd 
Dimentionless through Heav'nly dores; then clad 
With incense, where the Golden Altar fum'd, 
By thir great Intercessor, came in sight 
Before the Fathers Throne: Them the glad Son 
Presenting, thus to intercede began. 
See Father, what first fruits on Earth are sprung 
From thy implanted Grace in Man, these Sighs 
And Prayers, which in this Golden Censer, mixt 
With Incense, I thy Priest before thee bring, 
Fruits of more pleasing savour from thy seed 
Sow'n with contrition in his heart, then those 
Which his own hand manuring all the Trees 
Of Paradise could have produc't, ere fall'n 
From innocence. Now therefore bend thine eare 
To supplication, heare his sighs though mute; 
Unskilful with what words to pray, Iet mee 
Interpret for him, mee his Advocate 
And propitiation, all his works on mee 
Good or not good ingraft, my Merit those 
Shall perfet, and for these my Death shall pay. 
Accept me, and in mee from these receave 
The smell of peace toward Mankinde, let him live 
Before thee reconcil'd, at least his days 
Numberd, though sad, till Death, his doom (which I 
To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse) 
To better life shall yeeld him, where with mee 
All my redeemd may dwell in joy and bliss, 
Made one with me as I with thee am one. 
To whom the Father, without Cloud, serene. 
All thy request for Man, accepted Son, 
Obtain, all thy request was my Decree: 
But longer in that Paradise to dwell, 
The Law I gave to Nature him forbids: 
Those pure immortal Elements that know 
No gross, no unharmoneous mixture foule, 
Eject him tainted now, and purge him off 
As a distemper, gross to aire as gross, 
And mortal food, as may dispose him best 
For dissolution wrought by Sin, that first 
Distemperd all things, and of incorrupt 
Corrupted. I at first with two fair gifts 
Created him endowd, with Happiness 
And Immortalitie: that fondly lost, 
This other serv'd but to eternize woe; 
Till I provided Death; so Death becomes 
His final remedie, and after Life 
Tri'd in sharp tribulation, and refin'd 
By Faith and faithful works, to second Life, 
Wak't in the renovation of the just, 
Resignes him up with Heav'n and Earth renewd. 
But let us call to Synod all the Blest 
Through Heav'ns wide bounds; from them I will not hide 
My judgments, how with Mankind I proceed, 
As how with peccant Angels late they saw; 
And in thir state, though firm, stood more confirmd. 
He ended, and the Son gave signal high 
To the bright Minister that watchd, hee blew 
His Trumpet, heard in Oreb since perhaps 
When God descended, and perhaps once more 
To sound at general Doom. Th' Angelic blast 
Filld all the Regions: from thir blissful Bowrs 
Of Amarantin Shade, Fountain or Spring, 
By the waters of Life, where ere they sate 
In fellowships of joy: the Sons of Light 
Hasted, resorting to the Summons high, 
And took thir Seats; till from his Throne supream 
Th' Almighty thus pronouncd his sovran Will. 
O Sons, like one of us Man is become 
To know both Good and Evil, since his taste 
Of that defended Fruit; but let him boast 
His knowledge of Good lost, and Evil got, 
Happier, had it suffic'd him to have known 
Good by it self, and Evil not at all. 
He sorrows now, repents, and prayes contrite, 
My motions in him, longer then they move, 
His heart I know, how variable and vain 
Self-left. Least therefore his now bolder hand 
Reach also of the Tree of Life, and eat, 
And live for ever, dream at least to live 
For ever, to remove him I decree, 
And send him from the Garden forth to Till 
The Ground whence he was taken, fitter soile. 
Michael, this my behest have thou in charge, 
Take to thee from among the Cherubim 
Thy choice of flaming Warriours, least the Fiend 
Or in behalf of Man, or to invade 
Vacant possession som new trouble raise: 
Hast thee, and from the Paradise of God 
Without remorse drive out the sinful Pair, 
From hallowd ground th' unholie, and denounce 
To them and to thir Progenie from thence 
Perpetual banishment. Yet least they faint 
At the sad Sentence rigorously urg'd, 
For I behold them softn'd and with tears 
Bewailing thir excess, all terror hide. 
If patiently thy bidding they obey, 
Dismiss them not disconsolate; reveale 
To Adam what shall come in future dayes, 
As I shall thee enlighten, intermix 
My Cov'nant in the womans seed renewd; 
So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace: 
And on the East side of the Garden place, 
Where entrance up from Eden easiest climbes, 
Cherubic watch, and of a Sword the flame 
Wide waving, all approach farr off to fright, 
And guard all passage to the Tree of Life: 
Least Paradise a receptacle prove 
To Spirits foule, and all my Trees thir prey, 
With whose stol'n Fruit Man once more to delude. 
He ceas'd; and th' Archangelic Power prepar'd 
For swift descent, with him the Cohort bright 
Of watchful Cherubim; four faces each 
Spangl'd with eyes more numerous then those 
Of Argus, and more wakeful then to drouze, 
Charm'd with Arcadian Pipe, the Pastoral Reed 
Of Hermes, or his opiate Rod. Mean while 
To resalute the World with sacred Light 
Leucothea wak'd, and with fresh dews imbalmd 
The Earth, when Adam and first Matron Eve 
Had ended now thir Orisons, and found 
Strength added from above, new hope to spring 
Out of despaire, joy, but with fear yet linkt; 
Which thus to Eve his welcome words renewd. 
Eve, easily may Faith admit, that all 
The good which we enjoy, from Heav'n descends; 
But that from us ought should ascend to Heav'n 
So prevalent as to concerne the mind 
Of God high-blest, or to incline his will, 
Hard to belief may seem; yet this will Prayer, 
Or one short sigh of humane breath, up-borne 
Ev'n to the Seat of God. For since I saught 
By Prayer th' offended Deitie to appease, 
Kneel'd and before him humbl'd all my heart, 
Methought I saw him placable and mild, 
Bending his eare; perswasion in me grew 
That I was heard with favour; peace returnd 
Home to my Brest, and to my memorie 
His promise, that thy Seed shall bruise our Foe; 
Which then not minded in dismay, yet now 
Assures me that the bitterness of death 
Is past, and we shall live. Whence Haile to thee, 
Eve rightly call'd, Mother of all Mankind, 
Mother of all things living, since by thee 
Man is to live, and all things live for Man. 
To whom thus Eve with sad demeanour meek. 
Ill worthie I such title should belong 
To me transgressour, who for thee ordaind 
A help, became thy snare; to mee reproach 
Rather belongs, distrust and all dispraise: 
But infinite in pardon was my Judge, 
That I who first brought Death on all, am grac't 
The sourse of life; next favourable thou, 
Who highly thus to entitle me voutsaf'st, 
Farr other name deserving. But the Field 
To labour calls us now with sweat impos'd, 
Though after sleepless Night; for see the Morn, 
All unconcern'd with our unrest, begins 
Her rosie progress smiling; let us forth, 
I never from thy side henceforth to stray, 
Wherere our days work lies, though now enjoind 
Laborious, till day droop; while here we dwell, 
What can be toilsom in these pleasant Walkes? 
Here let us live, though in fall'n state, content. 
So spake, so wish'd much-humbl'd Eve, but Fate 
Subscrib'd not; Nature first gave Signs, imprest 
On Bird, Beast, Aire, Aire suddenly eclips'd 
After short blush of Morn; nigh in her sight 
The Bird of Jove, stoopt from his aerie tour, 
Two Birds of gayest plume before him drove: 
Down from a Hill the Beast that reigns in Woods, 
First hunter then, pursu'd a gentle brace, 
Goodliest of all the Forrest, Hart and Hinde; 
Direct to th' Eastern Gate was bent thir flight. 
Adam observ'd, and with his Eye the chase 
Pursuing, not unmov'd to Eve thus spake. 
Shifting brilliancies. Then winter light
In a doorway, and on the stone doorstep
A beggar shivering in silhouette.
So the particular judgement might be set:
Bright puddle where the soul-free cloud-life roams.
And after the commanded journey, what?
Nothing magnificent, nothing unknown.
A gazing out from far away, alone.
And it is not particular at all,
Just old truth dawning: there is no next-time-round.
Unroofed scope. Knowledge-freshening wind.

Roof it again. Batten down. Dig in.
Drink out of tin. Know the scullery cold,
A latch, a door-bar, forged tongs and a grate.
Touch the crossbeam, drive iron in a wall,
Hang a line to verify the plumb
From lintel, coping-stone and chimney-breast.
Relocate the bedrock in the threshold.
Take squarings from the recessed gable pane.
Make your study the unregarded floor.
Sink every impulse like a bolt. Secure
The bastion of sensation. Do not waver
Into language. Do not waver in it.

Squarings? In the game of marbles, squarings
Were all those anglings, aimings, feints and squints
You were allowed before you'd shoot, all those
Hunkerings, tensings, pressures of the thumb,
Test-outs and pull-backs, re-envisagings,
All the ways your arms kept hoping towards
Blind certainties that were going to prevail
Beyond the one-off moment of the pitch.
A million million accuracies passed
Between your muscles' outreach and that space
Marked with three round holes and a drawn line.
You squinted out from a skylight of the world.

Three marble holes thumbed in the concrete road
Before the concrete hardened still remained
Three decades after the marble-player vanished
Into Australia. Three stops to play
The music of the arbitrary on.
Blow on them now and hear an undersong
Your levelled breath made once going over
The empty bottle. Improvise. Make free
Like old hay in its flimsy afterlife
High on a windblown hedge. Ocarina earth.
Three listening posts up on some hard-baked tier
Above the resonating amphorae.

Once, as a child, out in a field of sheep,
Thomas Hardy pretended to be dead
And lay down flat among their dainty shins.
In that sniffed-at, bleated-into, grassy space
He experimented with infinity.
His small cool brow was like an anvil waiting
For sky to make it sing the perfect pitch
Of his dumb being, and that stir he caused
In the fleece-hustle was the original
Of a ripple that would travel eighty years
Outward from there, to be the same ripple
Inside him at its last circumference.

(I misremembered. He went down on all fours,
Florence Emily says, crossing a ewe-leaze.
Hardy sought the creatures face to face,
Their witless eyes and liability
To panic made him feel less alone,
Made proleptic sorrow stand a moment
Over him, perfectly known and sure.
And then the flock's dismay went swimming on
Into the blinks and murmurs and deflections
He'd know at parties in renowned old age
When sometimes he imagined himself a ghost
And circulated with that new perspective.)

The annals say: when the monks of Clonmacnoise
Were all at prayers inside the oratory
A ship appeared above them in the air.
The anchor dragged along behind so deep
It hooked itself into the altar rails
And then, as the big hull rocked to a standstill,
A crewman shinned and grappled down the rope
And struggled to release it. But in vain.
'This man can't bear our life here and will drown,'
The abbot said, 'unless we help him.' So
They did, the freed ship sailed, and the man climbed back
Out of the marvellous as he had known it.

A boat that did not rock or wobble once
Sat in long grass one Sunday afternoon
In nineteen forty-one or -two. The heat
Out on Lough Neagh and in where cattle stood
Jostling and skittering near the hedge
Grew redolent of the tweed skirt and tweed sleeve
I nursed on. I remember little treble
Timber-notes their smart heels struck from planks,
Me cradled in an elbow like a secret
Open now as the eye of heaven was then
Above three sisters talking, talking steady
In a boat the ground still falls and falls from under.

Overhang of grass and seedling birch
On the quarry face. Rock-hob where you watched
All that cargoed brightness travelling
Above and beyond and sumptuously across
The water in its clear deep dangerous holes
On the quarry floor. Ultimate
Fathomableness, ultimate
Stony up-againstness: could you reconcile
What was diaphanous there with what was massive?
Were you equal to or were you opposite
To build-ups so promiscuous and weightless?
Shield your eyes, look up and face the music.
And lightening? One meaning of that
Beyond the usual sense of alleviation,
Illumination, and so on, is this:
A phenomenal instant when the spirit flares
The good thief in us harking to the promise!
So paint him on Christ's right hand, on a promontory
Scanning empty space, so body-racked he seems
Untranslatable into the bliss
Ached for at the moon-rim of his forehead,
By nail-craters on the dark side of his brain:
This day thou shall be with Me in Paradise.
Upon a bank, easeless with knobs of gold, 
  Beneath a canopy of noonday smoke,
I saw a measureless Beast, morose and bold,
  With eyes like one from filthy dreams awoke, 
Who stares upon the daylight in despair 
For very terror of the nothing there.
This beast in one flat hand clutched vulture-wise 
  A glittering image of itself in jet,
And with the other groped about its eyes
  To drive away the dreams that pestered it; 
And never ceased its coils to toss and beat 
The mire encumbering its feeble feet.
Sharp was its hunger, though continually
  It seemed a cud of stones to ruminate, 
And often like a dog let glittering lie
  This meatless fare, its foolish gaze to sate; 
Once more convulsively to stoop its jaw, 
Or seize the morsel with an envious paw.
Indeed, it seemed a hidden enemy
  Must lurk within the clouds above that bank,
It strained so wildly its pale, stubborn eye,
  To pierce its own foul vapours dim and dank; 
Till, wearied out, it raved in wrath and foam, 
Daring that Nought Invisible to come.
Ay, and it seemed some strange delight to find 
  In this unmeaning din, till, suddenly, 
As if it heard a rumour on the wind,
  Or far away its freer children cry,
Lifting its face made-quiet, there it stayed, 
Till died the echo its own rage had made.
That place alone was barren where it lay;
  Flowers bloomed beyond, utterly sweet and fair; 
And even its own dull heart might think to stay 
  In livelong thirst of a clear river there,
Flowing from unseen hills to unheard seas, 
Through a still vale of yew and almond trees.
And then I spied in the lush green below
  Its tortured belly, One, like silver, pale, 
With fingers closed upon a rope of straw,
  That bound the Beast, squat neck to hoary tail; 
Lonely in all that verdure faint and deep, 
He watched the monster as a shepherd sheep.
I marvelled at the power, strength, and rage
  Of this poor creature in such slavery bound; 
Fettered with worms of fear; forlorn with age;
  Its blue wing-stumps stretched helpless on the ground; 
While twilight faded into darkness deep, 
And he who watched it piped its pangs asleep.

I am afraid after reading all these so-called initiation books that some
cortege of boot lickers will enter my room while I am sleeping and suck
my eyes out with soda straws they will be older men and women much like
up and tell on you the Unferths of the world better beware
I thought he was going to kill me he was just walking around just talking
Jude put his hand up to his mouth and said down the table I think Jesus is going
off his rocker get Simon to tell you what he asked me
bottles of that wine they make over there
sure thing Jesus I says
to do in case anything happens I know one of you is going to do me in I know
the other night I walked down the streets in a disguise and I seen a couple
look-see I got you Jesus Judas says
John leans over he says been catching any fish Peter
involved with women
now just listen to that little two-faced bastard James the Lesser says
the other night he was dressed fit to kill and drunk as six hundred dollars
Thomas spoke up for once he says I know what you mean the other day Andrew
temple he knew more about it than the elder did
all the time Jesus just mumbling to himself wine spilt all over his robe
the rest of them chattering and cussing trying to figure him out
to talk and you see a soldier coming and you say anybody seen a stray mule
get me a rope and tie it to a pillar and a jackass and do it myself
wake up Jesus Philip says
those fellows in the temples have got it all organized all they have to do
through so that is making you an enemy of the people we just got to get
organized as is proved here today by your followers carrying on as they did
I told you a long time ago not to keep talking with them temple people John says
why you ought to know that when we first run on to you we had second thoughts
this second that still thinks you are a crazy one but Jesus you should a known
we been through a lot together we go a long way back you should a listened
competition they want to keep feeding the hogs the same slop
they the ones that want to get fat man you listening to me Jesus
we could always go back to biting the heads off fish and chickens Peter says
like we were a bunch of sheep picking up your tab bailing you out of jail
coming up here all the time for supper and what do we get to eat nothing
ok this is what we going to do he says hold on who is that walking up the steps
how does it go boy Jesus says and the other one answers just fine Jesus just fine
and John the Baptist turns around he says to the one who has just slipped in boy
old like he was young just like Elvis did to Big Dad Arthur I know
just like another blind singer the men come down to see with their equipment
feel who were young as purple flowers from Hawaii once when they listen to their
don't they tie another knot in they headband don't they wring that sweat out
have mercy Jesus deliver me from the lawyers and the teachers and the preachers
chunk out of me oh brother I am death and you are sleep I am white and you are
black brother tell me I am that which I am I am sleep and you are death we are
one person getting up and going outside naked as a blue jay rolling our bellies
how do they like it when the ones who sung shake they leg on the Television
whispers some with a kiss and some with a gun and some with a six bit fountain
pen whoa lord help me and my brother help us get through this tookover land
Dear Aleph,
This is what it means to die among barbarians. Bar bar bar
barbarians. We make them reveal
the brutes they are, Aleph, by the things
we make them name. David,
they tell me, is the one
one should aspire to, but ever since
I first heard them say Philistine
if I am anything.
In such a night, when every louder wind
Is to its distant cavern safe confined;
And only gentle Zephyr fans his wings,
And lonely Philomel, still waking, sings;
In such a night, when passing clouds give place,
When in some river, overhung with green,
The waving moon and the trembling leaves are seen;
When freshened grass now bears itself upright,
And makes cool banks to pleasing rest invite,
Whence springs the woodbind, and the bramble-rose,
And where the sleepy cowslip sheltered grows;
Whilst now a paler hue the foxglove takes,
Yet checkers still with red the dusky brakes
Shew trivial beauties, watch their hour to shine;
In perfect charms, and perfect virtue bright:
When odors, which declined repelling day,
When darkened groves their softest shadows wear,
And falling waters we distinctly hear;
When through the gloom more venerable shows
Some ancient fabric, awful in repose,
While sunburnt hills their swarthy looks conceal,
When the loosed horse now, as his pasture leads,
Whose stealing pace, and lengthened shade we fear,
Till torn-up forage in his teeth we hear:
When nibbling sheep at large pursue their food,
And unmolested kine rechew the cud;
When curlews cry beneath the village walls,
And to her straggling brood the partridge calls;
Their shortlived jubilee the creatures keep,
Which but endures, whilst tyrant man does sleep;
When a sedate content the spirit feels,
And no fierce light disturbs, whilst it reveals;
But silent musings urge the mind to seek
Something, too high for syllables to speak;
Till the free soul to a composedness charmed,
Finding the elements of rage disarmed,
In such a night let me abroad remain,
Our cares, our toils, our clamors are renewed,
Or pleasures, seldom reached, again pursued.
At that time the sheep called to him
From their wormy bellies, as they
Lay bloating in the field. He was
A pastoralist,
The schoolhouse hardly handsize
In a sky of flax.
Then to keep the sayings of man
(The left hand writing; the right hand
Crossing out) farming the time by day
With a great rake
And in the evening hearing myths
Of the hurricane and the tornado
(Straws driven through glass),
And of the waking in the grave
(The sharp hands of brothers buried
Together).
Traps in the seed room broke the rat's
Back, and the rat called to him in
The next room over in a penetrating
Eloquent way.
Always deep night where the separated
Organs of the living slept in jars
(The lank goiter and the rotted
Appendix) awaiting the end-time
When the emasculated ram will rise
In the flax-blue sky
(Cold as the final bluing of a Sunday wash)
And all of us will know
The use in beauty of the whole body.
In the hay field was the beginning
Of knowledge:
Sour wine, the great rake hoisted
Toward the high sun-altar of the stack
And the hoist rope hauled out hard
(Like a greased whip of which the stories
Told were of the severing of limbs)
Sun in its extreme tower of noon.
All he heard was violent and sad
But he kept on writing the sayings
Of man with his left hand, and sent
Them off in broken words, and waited
In the mortal field
Listening to the mice in the bottom
Of the stack.
Hangs like a stone over the field
Robed in its winding sheet as blue as air,
The shepherd hand of eloquence still keeps
And flashes
And the other (the right hand of
Obliterating habit) sleeps.

It is time to speak of the lies
almost deformed, too far forward,
a rug or tiled floor, loggias
and archways beyond her wildest ken
windows revealing hortus conclusi and winding paths
And what of all those blues and golds, so rife with wealth
The truth also is a small opening high up on the wall
And beyond the room, villagers working the fields,
donkeys dragging threshing boards over newly harvested wheat
this is an event reduced to a book she cannot read
a lily she does not smell
a lectern she never owned
She might as well comb her hair with a stiletto heel
Make of her body a cloud of white tulle
Carry a watering can and wear shapely wooden clogs
Fake glamour in a black bare-back gown
Crouch on the ground flipping coins
Pop a pogo stick between her legs and levitate
She could be sitting in her slip, bored,
bored to death, the intercom
image appearing out of nowhere,
announcing a stranger
Her eyes will go wide, not expecting this
Her ears have encountered only silence
The trees thin
The cumulus sky crackles ever so quietly
Somewhere a rainbow breaks
Hail comes in pellets
Or she could be blending a batch of myrrh
and roses to deodorize the foul
stench of the room that opens out
not on a vista of budding poplars
but on sewage,
piles of it
come to rot at the side of the road
just there, in front of her door
The breeze may be the whisper of something
or his feathers could begin to moult
or she could cringe at wings,
trying to scoop her up, knock her down,
drown her in their soft pile,
snuff out any NO she stashes in her mind,
or the wind could whip his feathers
and blow the townsfolk quickly to her side
In his eyes, pools of light map no pollution, only flame
In hers, no flecks, no threads mar the cobalt calm
Her lids lower
Chrysalises, her eyes close on their private dusk
For the child she will have boundless love
For posterity the memory of being
For her life no proper translation
I
Along the Wilderness Road, through Cumberland Gap,
Across a buff clay belt with scrawls of stone,
Where bird and beast quailed in the bosom brush
Blue white, like sheer icicles, spired aglow
As if the three wise men barged in the East
Or priests in sackcloth balked the Scourge of God.
Foursquare by the rite of arm and heart and law,
The scrubby log cabin dared the compass points
The babel of the circumstance and era.
The frozen socket of its window stared
Beyond the spayed crabapple trees, to where
The skulls of hills, the skeletons of barrens,
Not knowing muck and star would vie for him,
The man Tom sank upon ax-split stool,
Hands fisted, feet set wide to brace the spirit,
Big shoulders shoved, dark hazel eyes glazed by
Grotesqueries of flame that yawled and danced
Up, up, the stick-clay chimney. While fire imps combed
The black and bristling hair, the acids of thoughts
Made of the orby face an etching-plate.
II
Near pyrotechnic logs, the purling kettle,
A granny at a childbed on the border,
Where head and backbone answered the tomahawk
Her wise old eyes had seen a hundred Nancys
In travail tread the dark winepress alone;
Her wise old hands had plucked a stubborn breed
Into the outer world of pitch and toss.
The cabin that her myth and mission entered
Became a castle in which Aunt Peggy throned
A dynasty of grunts and nods and glances.
The nest, the barn, the hovel had schooled her in
The ABC of motherhood, and somehow
She sensed so accurately a coming child
And now her keyhole look explored Tom Lincoln
Beneath the patched homespun, the hue and cry
Of malice, until she touched his loneliness,
The taproot that his fiber gave no tongue.
Then, lulling the wife, troubled in flesh and mind,
She eased the sack quilts higher and mused the while:
And seven times seventy ways of leaving it!
III
The woman Nancy, like a voyager sucked
Buoyed to the surface air of consciousness
And clutched the solace of her corn-husk bed.
Her dark face, sharped in forehead, cheekbone, chin,
Cuddled in dark brown hair; her eyes waxed grayer
With wonder of the interlude: her beauty
Out of the fog of pain, the bog of bygones,
The bag of cabin cant and tavern tattle,
She puzzled now, as then, about her father
Who let wild Lucy Hanks bundle and carry
Flesh of his flesh beyond the Cumberland Gap;
A strange roof is no roof when imps of fear
Pilfer the fatherless in blossom time.
Year in, year out, the daughter tinkered with
The riddle of her birth; the mother chided
The woman Nancy as she had the child,
The butt of bawd, grand jury, Sunday bonnet,
Lucy, driven, taught her daughter the Word,
And Nancy, driven, taught her son the Word,
And Abraham, driven, taught his people the Word!
IV
The man Tom bit his fingernails, then rammed
His pockets with the hector hands that gave
Raw timber the shape of cabinet and coffin,
He tapped the dirt floor with the iron-capped boot
That aided fist and skull in border fights.
Poor Joseph probably said in that low stable
She paused, then boxed the ears of cynicism:
Among the hogs, the chickens, the cows, the horses;
But, when it comes to Man, who knows, who knows
The man Tom turned and spat: his naked surmise
Conquered a land with gun and ax and plow,
How the elders wring it out is worry enough!
V
The clubfoot scholar bagged in Old World clothes,
With arrowy eyes and a hoary mushroom beard.
In spite of the hair-hung sword; his betters set
Him free to hail new truths in new lands, where
He seined with slave and master, knave and priest,
And out of all fished up the rights of man:
His full mug says a clear mind puts the question
Which ties the fogey scholar in a knot!
My new idea fed to his new baby
Would fetch the New World and the New Year peace!
The sum of anything unriddles the riddle:
The child whose wet nurse is the mother-of-all
Grows like a pine unmarked by rock or wind.
And Jesus begged the boon of little children!
VI
Aunt Peggy hovered closer, with flawless rites
Dragged from the bed of cleated poles; she hawed
Tom Lincoln, as one turns a nag aside,
Then swooped her way, even as a setting hen
Carves a dictatorship from yard to nest.
And Tom again was squeezed into a cell
Whose inmates were the ghosts of unsuccess.
Later his memories climbed a gala peak,
The bear meat, venison, wild turkey, duck,
The maple sugar hanging for the whiskey,
The red ham, gourds of syrup, bowls of honey,
The wood coal pit with brown and juicy sheep,
The guzzling, fiddling, guttling, monkeyshining:
A continent sprawled between that day and this!
A havenot on the frontier is no havenot;
A Crusoe without Friday has no conscience:
Of slavery, land titles, melancholy.
He, like his forebears, visioned a Promised Land
And tidied ways and means to fly the barrens
That doomed the flesh to peck, to patch, to pinch,
And wrung the soul of joy and beauty dry.
VII
The black ox hours limped by, and day crawled after.
White prongs of ice, like dinosaur fangs, gleamed in
The cavernous mouth of Rock Spring; snowbirds shivered
And chirped rebellion; a cow with jags and gaps
Chewed emptily; hogs squealed in hunger fits;
And scrags of dogs huddled against the chimney,
Which shoveled smoke dust into the throats and noses
Of ragged winds kicking up snow in the desert.
Nancy lay white, serene, like virgin milk
Beneath the sack quilts and the bearskin robe,
In yellow petticoat and linsey shirt,
An anonymity of soft red wrinkles.
Like ax and helve, like scythe and snath, the bond
Held Tom and Nancy; she smiled at his halt smile,
In front of the craft shop,
a small nativity,
mother, baby, sheep
made of white
and blue balloons.

Sky
Pick out the one

Some thing
close to nothing
from which,
fatherless,
everything has come.
Karshish, the picker-up of learning's crumbs,
The not-incurious in God's handiwork
(This man's-flesh he hath admirably made,
Blown like a bubble, kneaded like a paste,
To coop up and keep down on earth a space
That puff of vapour from his mouth, man's soul)
Breeder in me of what poor skill I boast,
Like me inquisitive how pricks and cracks
Befall the flesh through too much stress and strain,
Whereby the wily vapour fain would slip
And aptest in contrivance (under God)
The vagrant Scholar to his Sage at home
Sends greeting (health and knowledge, fame with peace)
One of the other sort, the melon-shaped,
(But fitter, pounded fine, for charms than drugs)
And writeth now the twenty-second time.
My journeyings were brought to Jericho;
Thus I resume. Who studious in our art
Shall count a little labour unrepaid?
I have shed sweat enough, left flesh and bone
On many a flinty furlong of this land.
Also, the country-side is all on fire
With rumours of a marching hitherward:
Some say Vespasian cometh, some, his son.
A black lynx snarled and pricked a tufted ear;
Lust of my blood inflamed his yellow balls:
I cried and threw my staff and he was gone.
Twice have the robbers stripped and beaten me,
And once a town declared me for a spy;
But at the end, I reach Jerusalem,
Since this poor covert where I pass the night,
This Bethany, lies scarce the distance thence
A man with plague-sores at the third degree
Runs till he drops down dead. Thou laughest here!
'Sooth, it elates me, thus reposed and safe,
To void the stuffing of my travel-scrip
And share with thee whatever Jewry yields
A viscid choler is observable
In tertians, I was nearly bold to say;
And falling-sickness hath a happier cure
Than our school wots of: there's a spider here
Weaves no web, watches on the ledge of tombs,
Sprinkled with mottles on an ash-grey back;
Take five and drop them . . . but who knows his mind,
The Syrian runagate I trust this to?
His service payeth me a sublimate
Blown up his nose to help the ailing eye.
Best wait: I reach Jerusalem at morn,
There set in order my experiences,
Or I might add, Judea's gum-tragacanth
Scales off in purer flakes, shines clearer-grained,
Cracks 'twixt the pestle and the porphyry,
In fine exceeds our produce. Scalp-disease
But zeal outruns discretion. Here I end.
Yet stay: my Syrian blinketh gratefully,
Suppose I write what harms not, though he steal?
I half resolve to tell thee, yet I blush,
What set me off a-writing first of all.
An itch I had, a sting to write, a tang!
His case has struck me far more than 'tis worth.
In the great press of novelty at hand
The care and pains this somehow stole from me)
I bid thee take the thing while fresh in mind,
The very man is gone from me but now,
Whose ailment is the subject of discourse.
Thus then, and let thy better wit help all!
By epilepsy, at the turning-point
Of trance prolonged unduly some three days:
When, by the exhibition of some drug
Or spell, exorcization, stroke of art
Unknown to me and which 'twere well to know,
The evil thing out-breaking all at once
But, flinging (so to speak) life's gates too wide,
Making a clear house of it too suddenly,
The first conceit that entered might inscribe
Whatever it was minded on the wall
So plainly at that vantage, as it were,
(First come, first served) that nothing subsequent
Attaineth to erase those fancy-scrawls
The just-returned and new-established soul
Hath gotten now so thoroughly by heart
That henceforth she will read or these or none.
That he was dead (in fact they buried him)
By a Nazarene physician of his tribe:
"Such cases are diurnal," thou wilt cry.
Instead of giving way to time and health,
Should eat itself into the life of life,
As saffron tingeth flesh, blood, bones and all!
For see, how he takes up the after-life.
Sanguine, proportioned, fifty years of age,
The body's habit wholly laudable,
As much, indeed, beyond the common health
As he were made and put aside to show.
Think, could we penetrate by any drug
And bathe the wearied soul and worried flesh,
And bring it clear and fair, by three days' sleep!
Whence has the man the balm that brightens all?
This grown man eyes the world now like a child.
Some elders of his tribe, I should premise,
Led in their friend, obedient as a sheep,
To bear my inquisition. While they spoke,
He listened not except I spoke to him,
But folded his two hands and let them talk,
Watching the flies that buzzed: and yet no fool.
And that's a sample how his years must go.
Look, if a beggar, in fixed middle-life,
With straitened habits and with tastes starved small,
And take at once to his impoverished brain
The sudden element that changes things,
That sets the undreamed-of rapture at his hand
And puts the cheap old joy in the scorned dust?
Warily parsimonious, when no need,
Wasteful as drunkenness at undue times?
All prudent counsel as to what befits
The golden mean, is lost on such an one
The man's fantastic will is the man's law.
Heaven opened to a soul while yet on earth,
Earth forced on a soul's use while seeing heaven:
The man is witless of the size, the sum,
The value in proportion of all things,
Or whether it be little or be much.
Discourse to him of prodigious armaments
Assembled to besiege his city now,
'Tis one! Then take it on the other side,
With stupor at its very littleness,
(Far as I see) as if in that indeed
He caught prodigious import, whole results;
And so will turn to us the bystanders
In ever the same stupor (note this point)
That we too see not with his opened eyes.
Wonder and doubt come wrongly into play,
Preposterously, at cross purposes.
For scarce abatement of his cheerfulness,
Or pretermission of the daily craft!
While a word, gesture, glance, from that same child
At play or in the school or laid asleep,
Will startle him to an agony of fear,
Exasperation, just as like. Demand
Who lived there in the pyramid alone
Looked at us (dost thou mind?) when, being young,
We both would unadvisedly recite
Some charm's beginning, from that book of his,
Able to bid the sun throb wide and burst
All into stars, as suns grown old are wont.
Thou and the child have each a veil alike
Thrown o'er your heads, from under which ye both
Stretch your blind hands and trifle with a match
Over a mine of Greek fire, did ye know!
(It is the life to lead perforcedly)
Which runs across some vast distracting orb
Of glory on either side that meagre thread,
The spiritual life around the earthly life:
The law of that is known to him as this,
His heart and brain move there, his feet stay here.
So is the man perplext with impulses
Sudden to start off crosswise, not straight on,
Proclaiming what is right and wrong across,
"It should be" baulked by "here it cannot be."
And oft the man's soul springs into his face
As if he saw again and heard again
His sage that bade him "Rise" and he did rise.
Something, a word, a tick of the blood within
Admonishes: then back he sinks at once
To ashes, who was very fire before,
In sedulous recurrence to his trade
Whereby he earneth him the daily bread;
He sits at the table, cloudlight of March
One tone with his hair, gray-silver on silver.
Midday fare in Vermont is basic enough.
Think they are. Live here a few more winters,
Newcomers need a guide to show them the ropes,
And he has been explaining township and county
Almost from the sunstruck day we met him
That very first July in this old house.
A case I just happened to be involved in.
He holds his glass aloft and then lets fall
A silence that has grown familiar to us
From other stories told on other days,
The will to recount building its head of steam.
His name was Charlie Deudon, no doubt Canuck
Stock some generations back, but he
Deudons had been dirt farmers here as long
As anybody knew. They never starved
But never had a dime to spare, either.
Charlie resolved to change the Deudon luck.
We knew each other, naturally, but not
On terms of friendship. Fact is, he had no friends,
And only one girlfriend, whom he married
And then he set to work and never stopped
A wisp of a smile, half irony, half
Red cheeks, blue eyes, a beardless Santa Claus;
Whose bag contains (apart from instruments
Of healing) stories, parables and proverbs,
Painkillers, too, for when all else fails.
All the modern improvements, fancy feed
He was the first in these parts to milk
Charlie did himself, from dawn to midnight.
He never wasted a word or spilled a drop
Of milk or drank a drop of beer or liquor.
He was unnatural. And he made that farm
Into a showplace, a kind of 4-H model.
He made good money, yes, but not a dollar
Would he spend unnecessarily.
Do you get the picture? They hated him,
The boys that hung around the package store.
The most they ever got from tightfist Charlie
Deudon was a nod out from under his cap.
They envied him for getting his hay in first;
And there was more. A boy that he had hired,
By the name of Carroll Giddens, was their buddy.
Likeable fellow, regulation issue,
The sort that knocks back a pint or a fifth
In half a shake and tells off-color stories
About poor Charlie and his gold-plated farm. . . .
Teasing mischief has crept into his voice.
A self-taught anthropologist as well
As teller of tales, he has other frames
Of reference to place around events
Local or international. He knows
That things can stand for more than what they are;
And quotes chapter and verse to prove his point.
In halfway civilized societies
Duty, am I right? A fellow tribesman
Will do in a pinch, if animals are lacking,
Or if communal fears get screwed too tight. . . .
Anyhow, it was clear that something more
Than common envy stirred up the lynch law.
Seconds pass in silence as he stares
Floorboard. He looks up, eyebrows raised,
And twirls the glass stem between stubby fingers.
A coil of rope hung on the wall, we see,
Has made him pause and heave experienced sighs.
Not in the deed, Lord, no, just as a witness.
Charlie had this boy to help with chores,
The one named Carroll. Married, two kids, I think.
Not too reliable. But so few are;
Nor could you call his wages generous.
His buddies must have stood him drinks, is all
Was certainly drunk that Christmas Eve morning.
No reason to doubt what Charlie told his wife.
Loading a pair of milk cans into the barrow.
He took a slip and the whole business spilled.
Wooden handle clipped him in the side,
And he fell, too, right in the puddle of milk.
And started laughing. Charlie, you can guess,
And then the trouble starts, with Carroll swearing
And yelping, till Charlie gives him a little tap
And goes indoors. By then Carroll could tell
The barrow handle had cracked a rib or two.
Had roughed up his innocent assistant.
Time that stuck-up bastard got his due,
Et cetera . . . . As it was Christmas Eve,
Over to the Vermont side, and thus,
New Hampshire law enforcement and legal justice
Steps in. It tends to confuse the issue, see?
In wintertime, the river freezes over,
Till the month of March at the earliest.
By then, who knows which state the victim died in?
The loggers used to go to spend their money
To get knocked in the head at the right moment,
And pitched off the bridge into the water.
A famous local industry, but rather
Fallen on hard days by the early fifties,
Just like others more legitimate. . . .
Well, our local rowdies knew the routine,
And, when time came to follow up their threats,
They laid their plans according to tradition.
Christmas morning same as every day.
And when he came into the barn to do it,
We strain forward to hear him tell the rest;
The narrative spell is on him, and on us.
His voice weaves through fine-tuned nuances,
With sudden leaps in volume and skittish phrases
That somehow help flesh out what he describes.
We see the sprawling barn across the highway
From the white-columned porch of the old house.
See the barn closed up tight against the cold,
And the blue-gray light of December dawn
As Charlie crosses the road to do his chores.
The roosters shriek their morning alarm, the big
Slit with tight-strung wires of light knifing
Through cracks between the boards of the east wall.
Tufts of hay spill from cribs on both sides.
The waiting cattle stir and low as daylight
Breaks in on the darkness. Their master strides
In past the parked pickup truck, his pail,
A battered Rath Blackhawk lard can swinging
His fight song for the working holiday.
He hears the verses harnessed to his whistling,
The tune drawing its text along march tempo:
. . . it is to ride in a one-horse open sleigh-ay! 
And then all changes. Smash of the blackjack
Against his skull, exploding carnival
Of fire-veined shock that flies to the far corners
Of night. Four assailants leap from the back
Of the truck and lift him partly erect, the quicker
To bind his arms behind and truss them to
His half-bent legs, as you might rope a steer
Or sheep you meant to brand or slaughter.
They take him out to where the car is waiting
And throw him in the trunk like a sack of feed.
The bandits duck and climb inside their own.
Tires screech, the driver slams onto the highway,
A smile and wink all round as they drive north
To Woodsville. The sun is coming up when they
Cleanse me of my iniquity
and wash away my sins.
Laugh, Lord, at my obliquity.
In you laughter begins.
Regard this little steeple.
You gave to the High Plains
a flock of sheep, the people
who drink deep when it rains.
I shall number all the stones
Assyria has laid low.
I shall number all my bones
as David did long ago.
Oh, what a troubled route man took,
descending from the trees:
cave paintings and the printed book
made on his bended knees.
Lord, the broken spirit,
the sorrows in my heart
are much, much to inherit
and hard, hard to impart.

You say the old masters never got it wrong,
But when Goya painted the death of the imagination
It was a lost dog against a usurious yellow sky
And the dog, a hapless creature who had drawn itself
Ten miles on two legs, stared in amazement
To see the man who once fed him from his plate
Reduced to this. 
The beggar guest kicked from the table
Before his own dog, and even the honest unpicking
Of art performed nightly and in seclusion.
Like any Penelope my armor is resignation
Although I thought I would lift the bow myself
And draw.
By the morning he is gone
And what to make of this?
The prostitutes hang from a beam like mice
The suitors are piled unburied in the yard.
And some say that it is now much better
And others, that it is worse.
So order was restored
I stared in amazement

Perhaps Akhmatova was right
What tip, what pile of waste
Brings forth the tender verse
Like hogweed, like the fat hen under the fence
Like the unbearable present tense
Who knows what ill, what strife
What crude shack of a life
And how it twists sweetly about the broken sill:
Pressingness, another word for honeysuckle
But housewives? Has poetry
Ever deepened in the pail
Was it ever found in the sink, under the table
Did it rise in the oven, quietly able
To outhowl the hoover?
The sudden sleepless wail?
Did it ever?
It lives. It takes seed
Like the most unforgiving weed
Grows wilder as the child grows older
And spits on dreams, did I say
How it thrives in the ashen family nest 
Or how iambs are measured best
Where it hurts:
With the heel of an iron 
On the reluctant breast 
Of a shirt?

There was a hush, then Michael Blann
Stepped out onto the stage. Michael
Blann, with his pipe and his jukebox head
He has a song for all weathers, a pipe
And a voice, and he sings and he roams
He sings to the wind and a dog of how
On days when the sun is late and fine
Live and let live, sings Michael Blann
The wind yields not, but the hills is mine.
His sheep are all angels, the stars are his Lords
To humble tunes and hand-me-down words
The acts are written in briar strands
And the Pharisees are leaves in the air
I likes a drop pipes Michael Blann
Sing follow hark forward the innocent hare. 
To show the gods that Michael Blann
Went alone, alone for most of his years
But crossed the hills a singing man.

knitting a sweater;
getting better and better.
asleep in a tree;
where you once skinned your knee.
that stands in your palm.
Try to remember
the Twenty-first Psalm.
galloping south;
close your mouth.
drink from your cup.
The birds will keep singing
until they wake up.
the color of nascent snow
that laces over the ankle 
or the polychromatic beaded baby moccasins 
we saw lying in the museum drawer
that belonged to an infant from a sea tribe of seal hunters.
Or the rutilant pink blossoms 
of the locust tree that bloomed in the dark 
while I slept dreaming of my arrival 
not of a postulant, but of a flower vendor
or a woman covering disfigurement. 
Freud believed that religious faith 
is a wish-fulfilling illusion.
vastly oversized for his small feet with
sufficient spare space for a coyote den in each toe.
I want to buy him a kite.
a hand holding back my hair from my face 
The mouth so at home in the vicinity of pavement.
Pew also means to enclose, as in men who were 
as willingly pewed in the parish church 
as their sheep were in night folds.
Freud also believed civilized life imposes suffering,
yet he always wore a dinner jacket.
We delaminate layers of old paint
bleach sheets in the shade.
I take out the oily ham from the beans,
the unflattering photos from the folio, 
The rat traps emptied, the grain troughs filled.
The distance between sheep shed 
and my own ice-melt dripping on the mat
equals the diameter of moonlight squared
on his face as he looks up
and finds me again. Says
about to come looking. I step into
the warm. Two baas from out back
he lifts from my hair. In just 
such a manner are sleek blue words
slyly acquired by a wispy
happen. Seen a tear of mine, then two,
well up and slip loose 
as the little boat of orgasm
veers into the vortex.
You are a friend then, as I make it out, 
Of our man Shakespeare, who alone of us 
Will put an ass's head in Fairyland 
As he would add a shilling to more shillings, 
Miraculous inviolable increase 
Fills Ilion, Rome, or any town you like 
Of olden time with timeless Englishmen; 
All you down there where your small Avon flows 
By Stratford, and where you're an Alderman. 
Some, for a guess, would have him riding back 
To be a farrier there, or say a dyer; 
Or maybe one of your adept surveyors; 
Or like enough the wizard of all tanners. 
The nimble element, the true caloric; 
I see it, and was told of it, moreover, 
By our discriminate friend himself, no other. 
Had you been one of the sad average, 
The sinew and the solvent of our Island, 
You'd not be buying beer for this Terpander's 
Approved and estimated friend Ben Jonson; 
He'd never foist it as a part of his 
Contingent entertainment of a townsman 
While he goes off rehearsing, as he must, 
If he shall ever be the Duke of Stratford. 
Far from it; for one town's as like another 
And there's the Stratford in him; he denies it, 
And there's the Shakespeare in him. So, God help him! 
I tell him he needs Greek; but neither God 
Nor Greek will help him. Nothing will help that man. 
You see the fates have given him so much, 
Of London, where he sees too many lords. 
They're part of half what ails him: I suppose 
There's nothing fouler down among the demons 
Than what it is he feels when he remembers 
The dust and sweat and ointment of his calling 
With his lords looking on and laughing at him. 
King as he is, he can't be king de facto, 
And that's as well, because he wouldn't like it; 
He'd frame a lower rating of men then 
Than he has now; and after that would come 
An abdication or an apoplexy. 
Though half the world, if not the whole of it, 
May crown him with a crown that fits no king 
Save Lord Apollo's homesick emissary: 
Not there on Avon, or on any stream 
Where Naiads and their white arms are no more, 
Shall he find home again. It's all too bad. 
The best you ever saw; and he'll be there 
Anon, as you're an Alderman. Good God! 
He makes me lie awake o'nights and laugh. 
And you have known him from his origin, 
You tell me; and a most uncommon urchin 
A trifle terrifying, I dare say, 
Discovering a world with his man's eyes, 
Quite as another lad might see some finches, 
If he looked hard and had an eye for nature. 
But this one had his eyes and their foretelling, 
And he had you to fare with, and what else? 
As a boy should, I venture; and the dog, 
Most likely, was the only man who knew him. 
A dog, for all I know, is what he needs 
As much as anything right here to-day, 
To counsel him about his disillusions, 
A dog of orders, an emeritus, 
To wag his tail at him when he comes home, 
And then to put his paws up on his knees 
And say, "For God's sake, what's it all about?" 
Or what he needs. I tell him he needs Greek; 
I'll talk of rules and Aristotle with him, 
And if his tongue's at home he'll say to that, 
I have your word that Aristotle knows, 
And you mine that I don't know Aristotle." 
He's all at odds with all the unities, 
And what's yet worse, it doesn't seem to matter; 
He treads along through Time's old wilderness 
As if the tramp of all the centuries 
And that's a pity, or I say it is. 
Going his way, the way that he goes best, 
A pleasant animal with no great noise 
Save only divers and inclement devils 
Have made of late his heart their dwelling place. 
A flame half ready to fly out sometimes 
At some annoyance may be fanned up in him, 
But soon it falls, and when it falls goes out; 
He knows how little room there is in there 
For crude and futile animosities, 
And how much for the joy of being whole, 
And how much for long sorrow and old pain. 
On our side there are some who may be given 
To grow old wondering what he thinks of us 
And some above us, who are, in his eyes, 
Yet here we smile, or disappoint the gods 
Who made it so: the gods have always eyes 
To see men scratch; and they see one down here 
Who itches, manor-bitten to the bone, 
The lord of more than England and of more 
Than all the seas of England in all time 
Shall ever wash. D'ye wonder that I laugh? 
He sees me, and he doesn't seem to care; 
And why the devil should he? I can't tell you. 
I'll meet him out alone of a bright Sunday, 
Trim, rather spruce, and quite the gentleman. 
"What ho, my lord!" say I. He doesn't hear me; 
Wherefore I have to pause and look at him. 
He's not enormous, but one looks at him. 
A little on the round if you insist, 
For now, God save the mark, he's growing old; 
He's five and forty, and to hear him talk 
These days you'd call him eighty; then you'd add 
More years to that. He's old enough to be 
The father of a world, and so he is. 
"Ben, you're a scholar, what's the time of day?" 
Says he; and there shines out of him again 
Half-mad serenity that laughs at fame 
For being won so easy, and at friends 
Who laugh at him for what he wants the most, 
By which you see we're all a little jealous ... 
 Poor Greene! I fear the color of his name 
Was even as that of his ascending soul; 
Some scrivening to the end against their fate, 
Their puppets all in ink and all to die there; 
And some with hands that once would shade an eye 
Will reach by this time for a pot-house mop 
To slush their first and last of royalties. 
Poor devils! and they all play to his hand; 
For so it was in Athens and old Rome. 
But that's not here or there; I've wandered off. 
Greene does it, or I'm careful. Where's that boy? 
Yes, he'll go back to Stratford. And we'll miss him? 
Dear sir, there'll be no London here without him. 
We'll all be riding, one of these fine days, 
And then we'll think of what he never said 
With what he did say, would buy many horses. 
Though nowadays he's not so much for women: 
"So few of them," he says, "are worth the guessing." 
But there's a worm at work when he says that, 
And while he says it one feels in the air 
A deal of circumambient hocus-pocus. 
They've had him dancing till his toes were tender, 
And he can feel 'em now, come chilly rains. 
There's no long cry for going into it, 
However, and we don't know much about it. 
But you in Stratford, like most here in London, 
Have more now in the Sonnets than you paid for; 
He's put one there with all her poison on, 
To make a singing fiction of a shadow 
That's in his life a fact, and always will be. 
But she's no care of ours, though Time, I fear, 
Will have a more reverberant ado 
About her than about another one 
Who seems to have decoyed him, married him, 
With much already learned, and more to learn, 
And more to follow. Lord! how I see him now, 
Pretending, maybe trying, to be like us. 
Whatever he may have meant, we never had him; 
We'd flayed another had he tried it on us) 
That made as many of us as had wits 
More fond of all his easy distances 
Than one another's noise and clap-your-shoulder. 
But think you not, my friend, he'd never talk! 
Thereby acquiring much we knew before 
About ourselves, and hitherto had held 
Irrelevant, or not prime to the purpose. 
And there were some, of course, and there be now, 
Disordered and reduced amazedly 
Blackberries on either side, though on the right mainly,
A blackberry alley, going down in hooks, and a sea
Somewhere at the end of it, heaving. Blackberries
Big as the ball of my thumb, and dumb as eyes
Ebon in the hedges, fat
With blue-red juices. These they squander on my fingers.
I had not asked for such a blood sisterhood; they must love me.
They accommodate themselves to my milkbottle, flattening their sides.
Bits of burnt paper wheeling in a blown sky.
Theirs is the only voice, protesting, protesting.
I do not think the sea will appear at all.
The high, green meadows are glowing, as if lit from within.
I come to one bush of berries so ripe it is a bush of flies,
Hanging their bluegreen bellies and their wing panes in a Chinese screen.
One more hook, and the berries and bushes end.
The only thing to come now is the sea.
Slapping its phantom laundry in my face.
These hills are too green and sweet to have tasted salt.
Beating and beating at an intractable metal.
we were riding out to an abandoned farmhouse
on his pearl black Triumph
deaf to the sound of bleating sheep
that was when he told me it was the same model
James Dean had swapped for
three days after

so I hugged him tight
and set my head on his shoulder
and watched how the yellow moon was shifting
behind the pines
like the face of a jailbird
swing her way
but she was keeping quiet about it

we rumbled into the dry grass and started cutting
through the cornstalks
into a big clearing where he kicked
the bike stand
and told me to get off
he tossed his chrome aviators and then we started
our hike to the farmhouse
which was sagging in the field
opposite of us
we were quiet on the way like a couple of thieves
about to rob someone blind
I stood back as he tore a warped door
off the barn
and flung it into the gravel
inside the air was dusty and thick and the moon
was still with us

and now we were the jailbirds serving a lifetime
sentence without parole
John pulled off his steel-toe boots
and told me to wait for him
up in the hayloft
I left my loafers there and climbed a wood ladder
until I was looking into the eyes
of a great horned owl
he kept shaking his head

but while I was gathering the wet straw
I smelled smoke
and slid back down the ladder
that was when I saw the fire licking the crossbeams
and ran outside
John was passing through the wheat
like a final judgment
his figure was muscled with flame and I kept silent
as he reached for a head of grain
and burned it to the ground
cupping the buzzer instantly
while the host with the swatter stared.
In the spring our palms peeled like snakes.
True Arabs believed watermelon could heal fifty ways.
I changed these to fit the occasion.
Years before, a girl knocked,
wanted to see the Arab.
After that, my father told me who he was,
a good name, borrowed from the sky.
Today the headlines clot in my blood.
A little Palestinian dangles a truck on the front page.
Homeless fig, this tragedy with a terrible root
is too big for us. What flag can we wave?
I wave the flag of stone and seed,
table mat stitched in blue.
I call my father, we talk around the news.
It is too much for him,
neither of his two languages can reach it.
I drive into the country to find sheep, cows,
to plead with the air:
Who calls anyone civilized? 
Where can the crying heart graze?
What does a true Arab do now?
A large gray jumped, what I can only imagine is a dingo fence last night and made it at least 5 feet off the ground, under a full moon a million miles away, granite rocks and pine trees sealing a Cormac McCarthy evening. Wire song on cold wind musing low, tension wang and resonance, the land and ghosts play along and now and then a sheep bleets, but it hardly makes a bar onto these wire songs ...
Make your strokes thus: the horizontal:
as a cloud that slowly drifts across the horizon;
the vertical: as an ancient but strong vine stem;
the dot: a falling rock;
an apricot kernel, a dewdrop, the new moon,
the wave rising and falling. Do these
while holding your arm out above the paper
like the outstretched leg of a crane.
The strength of your hand
will give the stroke its bone.
But for real accomplishment, it would be well
if you would go to live solitary in a forest silence,
or beside a river flowing serenely.
It might also be useful
to look down a lonesome road,
and for the future
to stare into the gray static of a television screen,
or when lost in a video game
to accept you may never reach the final level,
where the dragon awaits, guarding the pot of gold,
despite all your adventures,
anyone following you could ever follow.

With Usura
With usura hath no man a house of good stone
each block cut smooth and well fitting
that design might cover their face,
with usura
hath no man a painted paradise on his church wall
harpes et luz
or where virgin receiveth message
and halo projects from incision,
with usura
seeth no man Gonzaga his heirs and his concubines
no picture is made to endure nor to live with
but it is made to sell and sell quickly
with usura, sin against nature,
is thy bread ever more of stale rags
is thy bread dry as paper,
with no mountain wheat, no strong flour
with usura the line grows thick
with usura is no clear demarcation
and no man can find site for his dwelling.
Stonecutter is kept from his tone
weaver is kept from his loom
WITH USURA
wool comes not to market
sheep bringeth no gain with usura
Usura is a murrain, usura
came not by usura
Duccio came not by usura
Came not by usura Angelico; came not Ambrogio Praedis,
Came no church of cut stone signed: Adamo me fecit.
Not by usura St. Trophime
Not by usura Saint Hilaire,
Usura rusteth the chisel
It rusteth the craft and the craftsman
It gnaweth the thread in the loom
None learneth to weave gold in her pattern;
Azure hath a canker by usura; cramoisi is unbroidered
Emerald findeth no Memling
Usura slayeth the child in the womb
It hath brought palsey to bed, lyeth
between the young bride and her bridegroom
Corpses are set to banquet
at behest of usura.
N.B. Usury: A charge for the use of purchasing power, levied without regard to production; often without regard to the possibilities of production. (Hence the failure of the Medici bank.)
There were scruffy local prophets
just beyond cannon-range
in every hamlet. Door-Hinge
for example, out on a limb
in Galilee, RI. Him
they tend to snub, until winter
cracks the mast off the yacht, &
the tub starts to founder
petrified in flounder-
Time gets old, echoes grow faint;
the statue in the park
steps into evening dark,
amnesia puts on war-paint.
Your icon, buried in the garden
sank like a thousand ships
into the grass. Those lips
whispering forgotten words
out of a lichen-book.
Words of the sea. Look,
a cedar replica. Her milky kingdom
was a salt-spray splinter,
shuddering Shaker-wheel spelled freedom.
1 
Vast oblong space 
dwindled to one solitary rock. 
On 
of a man. 
with his cane 
on some quixotic skirmish. 

All hope was gone. 
went toward the water. 

2 
An Apostle in white 
stood on a pavement of scarlet 
Around him 
stretched in deep sleep 
lay the dark forms of warriors. 
gazing on a wide waste. 
astonished everyone. 

3 
in battle array 
after some siege. 

weedy with flies. 
The Moon slid 
and tangled vines. 

4 
Neutrals collected bones 
or journeyed behind on foot 

to open. 

stealthy as linxes 
Always fresh footprints in the forest 
We closed a chasm 
then trod the ground firm 
I carried your name 
like a huge shield. 

5 
agile as wild-cats 
we leapt on a raft of ice. 
we carried them on our shoulders. 
A wave 
against a northern shore. 
An Indian trail 
led through wood and thicket 
Light broke on the forest 
was close at hand. 
and rushed in. 

6 
It was Him 
Judge of the Dead 
And all the angels. 
But from the book 
backward on their knees 
They blazed with artifice 
no pin, or kernel, or grain too small to pick up. 
A baby with a broken face lay on the leaves 
rushed by with a bundle of sticks. 
and helped himself to me. 

7 
Clearly headless. 
had only stolen straw. 
O sullen Silence 
Nail two sticks together 
and tell resurrection stories. 

8 
was the girl I had been before 
She waved 

and jumped 
But she missed the edge and swirled away. 

alone in his field of wheat 
One war-whoop toppled a State. 
but the mountains were gone. 

who were savages. 

We paddled with hands, planks, and a pencil 

and vanished in the fog. 

9 
Fire crackled in the forest stillness 
Now and then some sleeper would get up 
Warm her hands at the fire 
or the footfall of an animal 

10 
ticked the wiseacre clock. 

The final ruins ahead 
revealed two figures timidly engraved on one another. 

11 
I built a house 
that faced the east 
for fear of murder. 
Eternity dawned. 
of what rose 
and set 
of corpses. 

12 
the savage revenge 
on forerunners 
who follow. 
A newborn infant 
sat in the hollow 
of my pillow. 

13 
The house was a model of harmony. 
or lay on their backs. 

I asked what it ate. 
and so on. 
into icicles 
We practiced 
trips, falls, dives into snowdrifts. 
I opened the clock 

Outside, the world swarmed with sorcerers.
Cards in each mailbox, 
angel, manger, star and lamb, 
as the rural carrier, 
driving the snowy roads, 
hears from her bundles 
the plaintive bleating of sheep, 
the shuffle of sandals, 
the clopping of camels. 
At stop after stop, 
she opens the little tin door 
and places deep in the shadows 
the shepherds and wise men, 
the donkeys lank and weary, 
the cow who chews and muses. 
And from her Styrofoam cup, 
white as a star and perched 
on the dashboard, leading her 
ever into the distance, 
there is a hint of hazelnut, 
and then a touch of myrrh.

1
Who will honor the city without a name
If so many are dead and others pan gold
Or sell arms in faraway countries?
What shepherd's horn swathed in the bark of birch
Vagabonds, Pathfinders, brethren of a dissolved lodge?
This spring, in a desert, beyond a campsite flagpole,
I heard in a gray bush the buzzing of wild bees.
The current carried an echo and the timber of rafts.
A man in a visored cap and a woman in a kerchief
Pushed hard with their four hands at a heavy steering oar.
In the library, below a tower painted with the signs of the zodiac,
Kontrym would take a whiff from his snuffbox and smile
For despite Metternich all was not yet lost.
And on crooked lanes down the middle of a sandy highway
Jewish carts went their way while a black grouse hooted
2
In Death Valley I thought about styles of hairdo,
About a hand that shifted spotlights at the Student's Ball
In the city from which no voice could reach me.
Minerals did not sound the last trumpet.
There was only the rustle of a loosened grain of lava.
In Death Valley salt gleams from a dried-up lake bed.
Defend, defend yourself, says the tick-tock of the blood.
From the futility of solid rock, no wisdom.
In Death Valley no hawk or eagle against the sky.
The prediction of a Gypsy woman has come true.
In a lane under an arcade, then, I was reading a poem
Of someone who had lived next door, entitled "An Hour of Thought."
I looked long at the rearview mirror: there, the one man
Within three miles, an Indian, was walking a bicycle uphill.
3
With flutes, with torches
And a drum, boom, boom,
Look, the one who died in Istanbul, there, in the first row.
He walks arm in arm with his young lady,
And over them swallows fly.
They carry oars or staffs garlanded with leaves
And bunches of flowers from the shores of the Green Lakes,
As they came closer and closer, down Castle Street.
And then suddenly nothing, only a white puff of cloud
Over the Humanities Student Club,
Division of Creative Writing.
4
Books, we have written a whole library of them.
Lands, we have visited a great many of them.
Battles, we have lost a number of them.
Till we are no more, we and our Maryla.
5
Understanding and pity,
We value them highly.
What else?
Beauty and kisses,
Fame and its prizes,
Who cares?
Doctors and lawyers,
Well-turned-out majors,
Six feet of earth.
Rings, furs, and lashes,
Glances at Masses,
Rest in peace.
Sweet twin breasts, good night.
Sleep through to the light,
Without spiders.
6
The sun goes down above the Zealous Lithuanian Lodge
And kindles fire on landscapes "made from nature":
The valets had already brought in Theban candelabra
And pulled curtains, one after the other, slowly,
While, thinking I entered first, taking off my gloves,
I saw that all the eyes were fixed on me.
7
When I got rid of grieving
And the glory I was seeking,
Which I had no business doing,
I was carried by dragons
Over countries, bays, and mountains,
By fate, or by what happens.
Oh yes, I wanted to be me.
I toasted mirrors weepily
And learned my own stupidity.
From nails, mucous membrane,
Lungs, liver, bowels, and spleen
Whose house is made? Mine.
So what else is new?
I am not my own friend.
Time cuts me in two.
Monuments covered with snow,
Accept my gift. I wandered;
And where, I don't know.
8
Absent, burning, acrid, salty, sharp.
Thus the feast of Insubstantiality.
Under a gathering of clouds anywhere.
In a bay, on a plateau, in a dry arroyo.
No density. No harness of stone.
Even the Summa thins into straw and smoke.
And the angelic choirs fly over in a pomegranate seed
Sounding every few instants, not for us, their trumpets.
9
Light, universal, and yet it keeps changing.
For I love the light too, perhaps the light only.
Yet what is too dazzling and too high is not for me.
So when the clouds turn rosy, I think of light that is level
In the lands of birch and pine coated with crispy lichen,
Late in autumn, under the hoarfrost when the last milk caps
Rot under the firs and the hounds' barking echoes,
And jackdaws wheel over the tower of a Basilian church.
10
Unexpressed, untold.
But how?
The shortness of life,
the years quicker and quicker,
not remembering whether it happened in this or that autumn.
Retinues of homespun velveteen skirts,
giggles above a railing, pigtails askew,
sittings on chamberpots upstairs
when the sledge jingles under the columns of the porch
just before the moustachioed ones in wolf fur enter.
Female humanity,
children's snots, legs spread apart,
snarled hair, the milk boiling over,
And those centuries,
conceiving in the herring smell of the middle of the night
instead of playing something like a game of chess
or dancing an intellectual ballet.
And palisades,
and pregnant sheep,
and cows cured by incantations.
11
Not the Last Judgment, just a kermess by a river.
Small whistles, clay chickens, candied hearts.
So we trudged through the slush of melting snow
To buy bagels from the district of Smorgonie.
A fortune-teller hawking: "Your destiny, your planets."
And a toy devil bobbing in a tube of crimson brine.
Another, a rubber one, expired in the air squeaking,
By the stand where you bought stories of King Otto and Melusine.
12
Why should that city, defenseless and pure as the wedding necklace of
a forgotten tribe, keep offering itself to me?
Like blue and red-brown seeds beaded in Tuzigoot in the copper desert
seven centuries ago.
Where ocher rubbed into stone still waits for the brow and cheekbone
it would adorn, though for all that time there has been no one.
What evil in me, what pity has made me deserve this offering?
It stands before me, ready, not even the smoke from one chimney is
lacking, not one echo, when I step across the rivers that separate us.
inside Arizona, because except fo me no one else knows that they ever
lived.
They trot before me on Embankment Street, two hently born parakeets
from Samogitia, and at night they unravel their spinster tresses of gray
hair.
Here there is no earlier and no later; the seasons of the year and of the
day are simultaneous.
at the gate collect the turnpike toll in leather bags.
Rattling their wheels, "Courier" and "Speedy" move against the current
to Werki, and an oarsman shot down over England skiffs past, spread-
eagled by his oars.
At St. Peter and Paul's the angels lower their thick eyelids in a smile
over a nun who has indecent thoughts.
Bearded, in a wig, Mrs. Sora Klok sits at the counter, instructing her
twelve shopgirls.
And all of German Street tosses into the air unfurled bolts of fabric,
preparing itself for death and the conquest of Jerusalem.
Black and princely, an underground river knocks at cellars of the
cathedral under the tomb of St. Casimir the Young and under the
half-charred oak logs in the hearth.
Carrying her servant's-basket on her shoulder, Barbara, dressed in
mourning, returns from the Lithuanian Mass at St. Nicholas to the
Romers' house in Bakszta Street.
How it glitters! the snow on Three Crosses Hill and Bekiesz Hill, not
to be melted by the breath of these brief lives.
And what do I know now, when I turn into Arsenal Street and open
my eyes once more on a useless end of the world?
I was running, as the silks rustled, through room after room without
stopping, for I believed in the existence of a last door.
But the shape of lips and an apple and a flower pinned to a dress were
all that one was permitted to know and take away.
The Earth, neither compassionate nor evil, neither beautiful nor atro-
cious, persisted, innocent, open to pain and desire.
And the gift was useless, if, later on, in the flarings of distant nights,
there was not less bitterness but more.
If I cannot so exhaust my life and their life that the bygone crying is
transformed, at last, into harmony.
put to rest forever between two familiar names.
The castle tower above the leafy tumulus grows small and there is still
In the immobile light I move my lips and perhaps I am even glad not
to find the desired word.

Berkeley, 1968
C. Damon, come drive thy flocks this way. 
C. I have a grassy scutcheon spied,
   Where Flora blazons all her pride. 
   The grass I aim to feast thy sheep: 
   The flowers I for thy temples keep.
D. Grass withers; and the flowers too fade.
C. Seize the short joys then, ere they vade, 
   Seest thou that unfrequented cave?
D. That den?
C. In whose cool bosom we may lie
   Safe from the sun.
   Tinkles within the concave shell.
D. Might a soul bathe there and be clean, 
   Or slake its drought?
D. These once had been enticing things,
   Clorinda, pastures, caves, and springs.
C. And what late change?
D.                       The other day 
   Pan met me.
C.              What did great Pan say?
   And his name swells my slender oat.
CHORUS 
Of Pan the flowery pastures sing, 
Caves echo, and the fountains ring. 
Sing then while he doth us inspire; 
Since all that beat about in Nature's range, 
Or veer or vanish; why should'st thou remain 
The only constant in a world of change, 
O yearning Thought! that liv'st but in the brain? 
Call to the Hours, that in the distance play, 
Fond Thought! not one of all that shining swarm 
Will breathe on thee with life-enkindling breath, 
Till when, like strangers shelt'ring from a storm, 
Hope and Despair meet in the porch of Death! 
Yet still thou haunt'st me; and though well I see, 
She is not thou, and only thou are she, 
Still, still as though some dear embodied Good, 
Some living Love before my eyes there stood 
With answering look a ready ear to lend, 
That this the meed of all my toils might be, 
To have a home, an English home, and thee!' 
Vain repetition! Home and Thou are one. 
The peacefull'st cot, the moon shall shine upon, 
Lulled by the thrush and wakened by the lark, 
Whose Helmsman on an ocean waste and wide 
Sits mute and pale his mouldering helm beside. 
And art thou nothing? Such thou art, as when 
The woodman winding westward up the glen 
At wintry dawn, where o'er the sheep-track's maze 
The viewless snow-mist weaves a glist'ning haze, 
Sees full before him, gliding without tread, 
An image with a glory round its head; 
The enamoured rustic worships its fair hues, 
Nor knows he makes the shadow, he pursues!
1 
Sometime now past in the Autumnal Tide, 
When Phoebus wanted but one hour to bed, 
The trees all richly clad, yet void of pride, 
Of green, of red, of yellow, mixed hew, 
Rapt were my senses at this delectable view. 
2 
I wist not what to wish, yet sure thought I, 
If so much excellence abide below, 
How excellent is he that dwells on high? 
Whose power and beauty by his works we know. 
Sure he is goodness, wisdom, glory, light, 
That hath this under world so richly dight. 
More Heaven than Earth was here, no winter and no night. 
3 
Then on a stately Oak I cast mine Eye, 
How long since thou wast in thine Infancy? 
Thy strength and stature, more thy years admire, 
Hath hundred winters past since thou wast born? 
Or thousand since thou brakest thy shell of horn, 
If so, all these as nought, Eternity doth scorn. 
4 
Whose beams was shaded by the leafy Tree. 
No wonder some made thee a Deity: 
Had I not better known (alas) the same had I. 
5 
Thou as a Bridegroom from thy Chamber rushes 
And as a strong man joys to run a race. 
The morn doth usher thee with smiles and blushes. 
The Earth reflects her glances in thy face. 
Birds, insects, Animals with Vegative, 
Thy heat from death and dullness doth revive: 
And in the darksome womb of fruitful nature dive. 
6 
Thy swift Annual and diurnal Course, 
Thy daily straight and yearly oblique path, 
Thy pleasing fervour, and thy scorching force, 
All mortals here the feeling knowledge hath. 
Thy presence makes it day, thy absence night, 
Quaternal seasons caused by thy might: 
Hail Creature, full of sweetness, beauty, and delight. 
7 
Art thou so full of glory that no Eye 
Hath strength thy shining Rays once to behold? 
And is thy splendid Throne erect so high? 
As, to approach it, can no earthly mould. 
How full of glory then must thy Creator be? 
Who gave this bright light luster unto thee: 
8 
Silent alone where none or saw, or heard, 
To sing some Song my mazed Muse thought meet. 
My great Creator I would magnifie, 
That nature had thus decked liberally: 
But Ah and Ah again, my imbecility! 
9 
I heard the merry grasshopper then sing, 
The black clad Cricket bear a second part. 
They kept one tune and played on the same string, 
Seeming to glory in their little Art. 
Shall creatures abject thus their voices raise? 
Whilst I, as mute, can warble forth no higher layes. 
10 
When present times look back to Ages past 
And men in being fancy those are dead, 
It makes things gone perpetually to last 
And calls back months and years that long since fled 
It makes a man more aged in conceit, 
While of their persons and their acts his mind doth treat. 
11 
Sometimes in Eden fair he seems to be, 
See glorious Adam there made Lord of all, 
Fancies the Apple, dangle on the Tree, 
To get his bread with pain and sweat of face: 
12 
Here sits our Grandame in retired place, 
And in her lap her bloody Cain new born, 
The weeping Imp oft looks her in the face, 
Bewails his unknown hap and fate forlorn; 
His Mother sighs to think of Paradise, 
And how she lost her bliss, to be more wise, 
Believing him that was, and is, Father of lyes. 
13 
Here Cain and Abel come to sacrifice, 
Fruits of the Earth and Fatlings each do bring, 
On Abels gift the fire descends from Skies, 
With sullen hateful looks he goes his wayes. 
Hath thousand thoughts to end his brothers dayes, 
Upon whose blood his future good he hopes to raise. 
14 
There Abel keeps his sheep, no ill he thinks, 
His brother comes, then acts his fratricide. 
The Virgin Earth of blood her first draught drinks, 
The wretch with ghastly face and dreadful mind, 
Thinks each he sees will serve him in his kind, 
Though none on Earth but kindred near then could he find. 
15 
Who fancies not his looks now at the Barr, 
His face like death, his heart with horror fraught, 
Nor Male-factor ever felt like warr, 
When deep despair with wish of life hath fought, 
Branded with guilt, and crusht with treble woes, 
A Vagabond to Land of Nod he goes. 
A City builds, that wals might him secure from foes. 
16 
Who thinks not oft upon the Fathers ages. 
Their long descent, how nephews sons they saw, 
The starry observations of those Sages, 
And how their precepts to their sons were law, 
Who neither guilt not yet the punishment could fly. 
17 
Our Life compare we with their length of dayes 
Who to the tenth of theirs doth now arrive? 
And though thus short, we shorten many wayes, 
Living so little while we are alive; 
In eating, drinking, sleeping, vain delight 
So unawares comes on perpetual night, 
And puts all pleasures vain unto eternal flight. 
18 
When I behold the heavens as in their prime, 
And then the earth (though old) still clad in green, 
The stones and trees, insensible of time, 
Nor age nor wrinkle on their front are seen; 
If winter come, and greenness then do fade, 
A Spring returns, and they more youthfull made; 
19 
By birth more noble than those creatures all, 
No sooner born, but grief and care makes fall 
That state obliterate he had at first: 
Nor youth, nor strength, nor wisdom spring again 
Nor habitations long their names retain, 
But in oblivion to the final day remain. 
20 
Shall I then praise the heavens, the trees, the earth 
Because their beauty and their strength last longer 
Shall I wish there, or never to had birth, 
Nay, they shall darken, perish, fade and dye, 
And when unmade, so ever shall they lye, 
But man was made for endless immortality. 
21 
Under the cooling shadow of a stately Elm 
Close sate I by a goodly Rivers side, 
Where gliding streams the Rocks did overwhelm; 
Now thought the rivers did the trees excel, 
And if the sun would ever shine, there would I dwell. 
22 
While on the stealing stream I fixt mine eye, 
I markt, nor crooks, nor rubs that there did lye 
Could hinder ought but still augment its force: 
O happy Flood, quoth I, that holds thy race 
Till thou arrive at thy beloved place, 
Nor is it rocks or shoals that can obstruct thy pace. 
23 
But hundred brooks in thy cleer waves do meet, 
So hand in hand along with thee they glide 
To Thetis house, where all imbrace and greet: 
Thou Emblem true of what I count the best, 
O could I lead my Rivolets to rest, 
So may we press to that vast mansion, ever blest. 
24 
That for each season have your habitation, 
Now salt, now fresh where you think best to glide 
To unknown coasts to give a visitation, 
In Lakes and ponds, you leave your numerous fry, 
So Nature taught, and yet you know not why, 
You watry folk that know not your felicity. 
25 
Look how the wantons frisk to tast the air, 
Then to the colder bottome streight they dive, 
To see what trade they, great ones, there do drive, 
And take the trembling prey before it yield, 
Whose armour is their scales, their spreading fins their shield. 
26 
While musing thus with contemplation fed, 
And thousand fancies buzzing in my brain, 
And chanted forth a most melodious strain 
Which rapt me so with wonder and delight, 
And wisht me wings with her a while to take my flight. 
27 
O merry Bird (said I) that fears no snares, 
That neither toyles nor hoards up in thy barn, 
Feels no sad thoughts, nor cruciating cares 
To gain more good, or shun what might thee harm 
Thy bed a bough, thy drink the water cleer, 
Reminds not what is past, nor whats to come dost fear. 
28 
The dawning morn with songs thou dost prevent, 
Sets hundred notes unto thy feathered crew, 
So each one tunes his pretty instrument, 
And warbling out the old, begin anew, 
And thus they pass their youth in summer season, 
Then follow thee into a better Region, 
29 
Man at the best a creature frail and vain, 
In knowledge ignorant, in strength but weak, 
Subject to sorrows, losses, sickness, pain, 
Each storm his state, his mind, his body break, 
From some of these he never finds cessation, 
But day or night, within, without, vexation, 
30 
And yet this sinfull creature, frail and vain, 
This lump of wretchedness, of sin and sorrow, 
This weather-beaten vessel wrackt with pain, 
Joys not in hope of an eternal morrow; 
Nor all his losses, crosses and vexation, 
In weight, in frequency and long duration 
Can make him deeply groan for that divine Translation. 
31 
The Mariner that on smooth waves doth glide, 
Sings merrily and steers his Barque with ease, 
As if he had command of wind and tide, 
And now becomes great Master of the seas; 
But suddenly a storm spoils all the sport, 
And makes him long for a more quiet port, 
32 
So he that faileth in this world of pleasure, 
But sad affliction comes and makes him see 
Only above is found all with security. 
33 
O Time the fatal wrack of mortal things, 
That draws oblivions curtains over kings, 
Their sumptuous monuments, men know them not, 
Their names without a Record are forgot, 
Nor wit, nor gold, nor buildings scape times rust; 
Shall last and shine when all of these are gone. 

Are happy in their homes and seminars. 
The frail spectacles are bedimmed with spring. 
Autumnal in their woolens, gaze 
Chair arm; leaning back, the head 
Well-cropped and grey, the experienced 
Easy did it. 
Made out that flecked mass in the East 
Sea. Often they saw the fishermen 
Plucks its icy Bavarian tune for them. 
Each paragraph a piston stroke. The sun 
Under the shadowing azure a violet 
The melancholy distributor of wit 
A whirl of dusty danger. 
Wept before the bishop. Mortify 
The flesh. Think on thy last end. Pray 
Deduced by Thomas from the tip of heaven. 
For any child the terror in the night, 
The hating eyes by day may be 
See this easy gentleman in tweeds, 
Deepchested, a swimmer to the farthest light, 
Diagnostician of the subaqueous 
Must not be bored, merciful or amused. 
And sterile hero in the cone of light; 
Spreading its lips for pretty butchery. 
In the dead sunny room. 
Beating the beds where other hearts have slept 
Weeping, weeping in vanity and grief 
Fancy, libertines of intelligence, 
I. Until Jove let it be, no colonist 
Looked for his living in the common wold. 
By reasoning and art. 
Then rivers felt his skiffs of the light alder; 
Pleiades, Hyades, and the Pole Star; 
By labor and by force of bitter need. 
Locates his house and granary underground, 
And frantic ant, scared of a poor old age. 
The threshing machine, the sledge, the weighted mattock, 
The withe baskets, the cheap furniture, 
If you still favor the divine countryside. 
III. Moreover, like men tempted by the straits 
We too must reckon on Arcturus star, 
The days of luminous Draco and the Kids. 
Let first the Pleiades and Hyades be hid 
The golden sun rules the great firmament 
Frozen with ice and rain, cerulean; 
Where pass in line the zodiacal stars. 
Styx and the lowest of the dead look on. 
Hark how the Mower Damon sung, 
With love of Juliana stung! 
While everything did seem to paint 
The scene more fit for his complaint. 
Like her fair eyes the day was fair, 
Sharp like his scythe his sorrow was, 
And withered like his hopes the grass. 
Which thus our sunburned meadows sear! 
And hamstringed frogs can dance no more. 
But in the brook the green frog wades; 
And grasshoppers seek out the shades. 
Only the snake, that kept within, 
Now glitters in its second skin. 
Nor Dog Star so inflame the days. 
Which burns the fields and mower both: 
Which mads the dog, and makes the sun 
Not July causeth these extremes, 
Of the hot day, or hot desires. 
To what cool cave shall I descend, 
Or to what gelid fountain bend? 
Alas! I look for ease in vain, 
When remedies themselves complain. 
No moisture but my tears do rest, 
Nor cold but in her icy breast. 
Esteem me, and my presents less? 
To thee the harmless snake I bring, 
To thee chameleons, changing hue, 
And oak leaves tipped with honey dew. 
Yet thou, ungrateful, hast not sought 
Nor what they are, nor who them brought. 
Through all the meadows I have mown. 
On me the morn her dew distills 
Before her darling daffodils. 
And, if at noon my toil me heat, 
The sun himself licks off my sweat. 
While, going home, the evening sweet 
In cowslip-water bathes my feet. 
The plains with an unnumbered flock, 
This scythe of mine discovers wide 
More ground than all his sheep do hide. 
With this the golden fleece I shear 
Of all these closes every year. 
And though in wool more poor than they, 
Yet am I richer far in hay. 
In which I see my picture done, 
As in a crescent moon the sun. 
The deathless fairies take me oft 
To lead them in their dances soft: 
And, when I tune myself to sing, 
About me they contract their ring. 
Had not Love here his thistles sowed! 
But now I all the day complain, 
Joining my labour to my pain; 
And with my scythe cut down the grass, 
Yet still my grief is where it was: 
But, when the iron blunter grows, 
While thus he threw his elbow round, 
Depopulating all the ground, 
And, with his whistling scythe, does cut 
Each stroke between the earth and root, 
Did into his own ankle glance; 
And there among the grass fell down, 
By his own scythe, the Mower mown. 
The blood I staunch, and wound I seal. 
Only for him no cure is found, 
I.
They let me go
at night, minus my timepiece, lighter,
personal effects. The air is always shaking
the same jars of safety pins: cicadas.
Song is my recidivism: always
I'm abandoning the road to stand
(unwatched, unseconded) in someone's
field. The stars (that are not mine)
tick fitfully, they always have
appointments. Punctual, six-sharp,
they are David's; they have lodged in his
death tent, have stuck in his mud sleep. Bad luck
leaves me a loan: no company, no katy-
did or promissory
note or night
can last.
The air
loses its nerve,
the old saw its eyeteeth and I

In hush the repossessors reach
the edges of the field. They pass
for shadows, sheep of ambush, animals of
permanence. They turn a black beyond returning
and they haunt the sleepless. I don't count,
who cannot earn my keep.

Give way so slowly, to such ambivalent light.

There was the method of kneeling,
a fine method, if you lived in a country
where stones were smooth.
hidden corners where knee fit rock.
Their prayers were weathered rib bones,
small calcium words uttered in sequence,
fuse them to the sky.
they walked like sheep.
Hear us! We have pain on earth!
We have so much pain there is no place to store it!
But the olives bobbed peacefully
in fragrant buckets of vinegar and thyme.
because there was also happiness.
Some prized the pilgrimage,
on foot, many times,
they would bend to kiss the earth
and return, their lean faces housing mystery.
While for certain cousins and grandmothers
lugging water from the spring
or balancing the baskets of grapes.
These were the ones present at births,
humming quietly to perspiring mothers.
forgetting how easily children soil clothes.
They told the old ones, you are wasting your time.
They prayed for Allah to mend their brains,
for the twig, the round moon,
to speak suddenly in a commanding tone.
And occasionally there would be one
who did none of this,
who beat everyone at dominoes,
and was famous for his laugh.
An hour inland from Bangor, Maine,
over rolling hills, in an oval pasture
surrounded by giant conifers,
the forest floor bejeweled
with ruby-studded mushrooms,
I watch the sheep sing,
if bleating could be called a song.
Maybe someone in a grove long ago
saw a man attached to a beast
of burden and so the concept
of the satyr was born. Memory is
the past reversed. I once
went out with a sailor, a Spaniard,
where I worked the roulette wheel
were slightly bowed, his voice
gruff and torn, and when he came
the sound seemed to climb up
not from his throat but from his feet
a deep song Lorca called duende.
and purple briefs soaking in a bucket
by the cabin door. He told me once
when he was a boy his grandmother
a chicken. The poor chicken,
laugh, feathers flying everywhere, his
grandmother screaming. And what
to call those half-human, half-chicken
kinds of days: scratching and clawing
at the earth, bathed in dust,
trying not to think about the simmering
anise, peppercorn, and broth.
When I visited him, he met me
ride south through field after field
of sunflowers. Por la tarde families
paraded, por la noche, only men
out past sunset. In an empty disco six
or seven guys danced, throwing themselves
around madly, slamming into each
Franco had died a few years back.
From my window that night, a full moon,
shadows of the town square, the boarded-up
cathedral, a cat in heat, the smell
of blood oranges. In the morning
his grandmother, all in black,
asleep stooped in a chair outside
my door. Nearby the ruins of an ancient
Roman temple, goats on hind legs
eating the pale green leaves from olive trees.
BOOK I 
A thing of beauty is a joy for ever: 
Its loveliness increases; it will never 
Pass into nothingness; but still will keep 
A bower quiet for us, and a sleep 
Full of sweet dreams, and health, and quiet breathing. 
Therefore, on every morrow, are we wreathing 
A flowery band to bind us to the earth, 
Spite of despondence, of the inhuman dearth 
Of noble natures, of the gloomy days, 
Of all the unhealthy and o'er-darkened ways 
Made for our searching: yes, in spite of all, 
Some shape of beauty moves away the pall 
From our dark spirits. Such the sun, the moon, 
Trees old and young, sprouting a shady boon 
For simple sheep; and such are daffodils 
With the green world they live in; and clear rills 
That for themselves a cooling covert make 
'Gainst the hot season; the mid forest brake, 
Rich with a sprinkling of fair musk-rose blooms: 
And such too is the grandeur of the dooms 
We have imagined for the mighty dead; 
All lovely tales that we have heard or read: 
An endless fountain of immortal drink, 
Pouring unto us from the heaven's brink. 
For one short hour; no, even as the trees 
That whisper round a temple become soon 
Dear as the temple's self, so does the moon, 
The passion poesy, glories infinite, 
Haunt us till they become a cheering light 
Unto our souls, and bound to us so fast, 
That, whether there be shine, or gloom o'ercast; 
They always must be with us, or we die. 
Will trace the story of Endymion. 
The very music of the name has gone 
Into my being, and each pleasant scene 
Is growing fresh before me as the green 
Of our own valleys: so I will begin 
Now while I cannot hear the city's din; 
Now while the early budders are just new, 
And run in mazes of the youngest hue 
About old forests; while the willow trails 
Its delicate amber; and the dairy pails 
Bring home increase of milk. And, as the year 
Grows lush in juicy stalks, I'll smoothly steer 
My little boat, for many quiet hours, 
With streams that deepen freshly into bowers. 
Many and many a verse I hope to write, 
Before the daisies, vermeil rimm'd and white, 
Hide in deep herbage; and ere yet the bees 
Hum about globes of clover and sweet peas, 
I must be near the middle of my story. 
O may no wintry season, bare and hoary, 
See it half finish'd: but let Autumn bold, 
With universal tinge of sober gold, 
Be all about me when I make an end. 
And now, at once adventuresome, I send 
My herald thought into a wilderness: 
There let its trumpet blow, and quickly dress 
My uncertain path with green, that I may speed 
Easily onward, thorough flowers and weed. 

my eye drinks itself, 
the little Buddha there,
Chinese grove god
in exchange for a ladleful of Hulstkamp,
please!
Never painted anything 
in frost-white or ice-skater blue 
or that Irish green 
always my own monotone,
not pleasant
to pursue that path so clearly.
I pick up the slate-pencil and certain things appear 
on paper or canvas
but I draw the line at homage under ornamental plants,
something for the boardroom!
...Creaking, 
little sheep squeaking, chromotypes
for the grandchildren 
(same idiots!) 
hits the spot, 
midpoint of colors, 
my shadow brown, 

 
The blocked chimney smokes 
the tree stumps are wet,
enough characters, 
the world is overpopulated as it is,
plentiful peach-fall, four rosebuds
asperged,
set to tread the boards
by this hand,
grown wrinkled
and with sluggish veins!
All the Juliets and Ophelias, 
all the soft mouths, the sighs
the original actresses long since turned to smoke,
Ariel too, away with the elements.
The age takes off its frockcoat. 
These lousy skulls of lords, 
their trains of thought
my lords makers of history
all of them crowned and sceptered illiterates,
yes, like so many bats or kites!
Sir Goon wrote to me lately: 
could only be mine,
of centuries
the booty never brought to light, 
the booths, the scaffolds, the cymbals 
gaps? Gap teeth maybe, 
but the great monkey jaws
would grind on
the tree stumps are wet
and the butler snores in porter dreams.
How shall a generation know its story
If it will know no other? When, among
The scoffers at the Institute, Pasteur
Heard one deny the cause of child-birth fever,
Indignantly he drew upon the blackboard,
For all to see, the Streptococcus chain.
His mind was like Odysseus and Plato
Exploring a new cosmos in the old
Suffering, disease, and death, the battleground
But then, the virus mutant in his vein,
How shall my generation tell its story?
Their fathers jobless, boys for the CCC
And NYA, the future like a stairwell
To floors without a window or a door,
And then the army: bayonet drill and foxhole;
Bombing to rubble cities with textbook names
Later to bulldoze streets for; their green bodies
Drowned in the greener surfs of rumored France.
My childhood friend, George Humphreys, whom I still see
Still ten years old, his uncombed hair and grin
His pastor father emptied by the grief.
Clark Harrison, at nineteen a survivor,
Never to walk or have a child or be
A senator or governor. Herr Wegner,
Who led his little troop, their standards high
And sabers drawn, against a panzer corps,
Emerging from among the shades at Dachau
Stacked like firewood for someone else to burn;
And Gerd Radomski, listening to broadcasts
Of names, a yearlong babel of the missing,
To find his wife and children. Then they came home,
Near middle age at twenty-two, to find
A new reunion of the church and state,
Cynical Constantines who need no name,
Domestic tranquility beaten to a sword,
Sons wasted by another lie in Asia,
Or Strangeloves they had feared that August day;
And they like runners, stung, behind a flag,
Running within a circle, bereft of joy.
Hearing of the disaster at Sedan
And the retreat worse than the one from Moscow,
Their son among the missing or the dead,
Pasteur and his wife Mary hired a carriage
And, traveling to the east where he might try
His way to Paris, stopping to ask each youth
Irascibility, found him at last
And, unsurprised, embraced and took him in.
Two wars later, the Prussian, once again
The first boy cured of rabies, now the keeper
To open it for them, though over seventy,
Lest he betray the master, took his life.
I like to think of Pasteur in Elysium
Beneath the sunny pine of ripe Provence
Tenderly raising black sheep, butterflies,
Silkworms, and a new culture, for delight,
Teaching his daughter to use a microscope
Practice and metaphysic all the same.
Humbling his pride by trying to write well,
Mozart, who lives still, keeping my attention
Repeatedly outside the reach of pride,
And him whose mark I witness as a trust.
Fastened by love upon the human cross.
Then, take this tambourine
inside the sheep barn,
listen to the anaconda's intestines,
the shark's walking stick,
learn the river insect's secret
neon calligraphy,
swim through Frida Khalo's hair
and come out smelling like orchids,
lift your appetite
towards the certified blue turtle,
feast on Garcia Lorca's leather shoes
and taste the sun, the worms of Andalusia,
don't hesitate in front of a donut,
a ferris wheel, the crab nebula,
excavate diamond-eyed demons,
Chaucer's liver, Minoan helmets,
and purchase a dozen metaphors,
beware of the absolute scorpion,
the iguana with the limping leg,
permit indwelling, white words around the eyes,
the confrontation of windows,
never feed your towel to the alligator,
he will eat you and eat you and eat you.

Meat-eater, salt-licker, piped spring
villa at Viareggio. The beach sheep
lire, dollars, Dolorous Daintyfoot,
Proudass, Chinadoll, a three-way clut-
ter, the piazza pizzeria. Mrs. Smith-
tells her rice-cake fortune, it is it.
Who to who? You yew alley ewes knew
goatsuckers in Swedish horse-hide hid
the boathouse key, locked the oarlock,
night. Night, ketchup cup, pepper-pot,
bid bound Belinda break her bracelets:
the dirty photographs apostrophize mon-
soons. Swimming snakes shake the lake.
The mountain north of Pasadena has severe
and angular back canyons where the light is always
unexpected, out of place, too simple for the
clutter of the granite blocks along the creeks.
The slopes have low rough shrubs, some firebreaks.
It rains sometimes, and then the soils wash easily
through Rubio and Eaton canyons to the small
catch-basins and the storage tanks. The bedrocks
tilt toward the west, and so the seepage
drains that way. Along a wall of the Arroyo,
it comes down in springs named Tibbets, Ivy,
Flutterwheel. These are the only steady water,
and the Indiana colony had hauled it out
the greasewood from the flats and planted groves of
orange and peach trees, built their houses in the
California Style with battened redwood boards.
Nearer the Arroyo, on its terraces,
picnics there and afterward would walk from
that side, down the bluff. The floor was cool,
and there were sycamore and alder, loose
irregular new channels through the willows.
On the other side, and south, below the San Rafaels,
Land and Water Company. And as a grudging
compromise between that tract and theirs,
the Central School was built in the dry neat
rows of the orchards east of where they lived.
Excursion parties from the Middle West were taken
mostly with the climate. At the citrus fairs,
Storms were rare and offered the consoling interest
of a flood in the Arroyo, loud and stupid
boulders the size of safes colliding down the wash.
A new hotel faced south on Colorado. Like the
Ward Block to its right across Fair Oaks,
it was substantial, frame, with dormers and
and looked as much like Boston as it needed to.
Someone from Los Angeles brought in a telephone.
He hooked it up in the store on the southeast corner,
rode back downtown and called and asked for
crossing, there were fewer lots each month,
new storefronts and more traffic, speculating
boomers and pikers, midnight sales, bands and free
lunches at the auctions. Owners were induced to move
east on Colorado to more eligible locations,
but the cross-streets led through dusty tent-lined
orchards to the chaparral. The boom came back
selling was the weather and a place to live, and
that was what was left. As their one industry,
the Novelty Works of Mr. Wakeley went on stuffing
scorpions and trapdoor spiders, horny toads,
small animals and birds. The balance of trade was
rockwork on the banks above his groves. The Arroyo
narrowed there, and so he had them build a
pumphouse and a dam and turn a railroad trestle
upside down between two concrete footings.
This was the central bridge. It crossed to open
ranchland that would subdivide more slowly than the
woodlots on the bluffs. Another bridge, La Loma,
farther south, was taller, with a wider span and
sycamores around its girders. It had replaced the
Johnston bridge and made it easier to sell the tracts.
The wealth of the invisible elite went into homes on
Grand and Orange Grove, Raymond, Nithsdale Rd.,
Arroyo Terrace, Bellefontaine, new bungalows
that looked much less expensive than they were.
In their commissions, Charles and Henry Greene
used common and available materials,
stones from the Arroyo, bricks, a simple flexible
pine frame of 2 x 4s and hand-split cedar shakes,
porches that were railed with the same rough timber
as the posts and beams and trusses and the overhanging
rafters for the roof. Their costs were mostly labor.
terraces and knolls, what trees and shrubs to save.
A local factory expanded to keep up with them,
the millmen and the carvers or the quality of
lumber that had just been shipped. Their mason did
exactly what they called for on retaining-walls,
the color of the fill, which stone or clinker at what
angle to the rest. Each minor thing they cared about
earned what it had to do with matters that were
not their business. Where the money for a house had
come from, what the Mayor had in mind, or
affairs like these beyond the garden stayed
accessible, a movement to and from the house
implicit in its horizontal lines. The roof was
long and relatively flat. Beams above the frames of
doors and windows were much broader than the
frames themselves and paralleled the covered
entryways and porches. Even the stairs inside
were less than vertical, each section of the railing
carved from a single piece of teak and joined to
kickplates, the splines and level boards that were
the facing of the well. Their stairs were furniture.
A bench along a landing had the same insistent
finish as the inglehook, the same square
ebony caps for screwheads as the chairs and tables.
Everything showed you how it went together.
A scarf or box-joint, metal straps, continuous
sure banding from the hallway into any room.
There was tile and leaded glass, but it was mostly
white cedar wainscots, doweled and pegged loose
furniture in teak or birch or lignum-vitae, a smooth
inside was outside too in rafters and stiff rounded
beam-ends that were oiled and rubbed. They looked
penetrable to light, looked as if they could
absorb and carry it at any single time toward the
was miles from the Arroyo. But it was imitation
Greene & Greene, a less impressive version of their
simplest large two-story frames. Its eaves on
both the north and south reached almost to the
repeated themselves with slightly different houses.
and I never spoke to him. He had a massive
tumor on his neck and jaw, and I would be
upstairs bedroom, probably the room across the hall from
the first and second stories, our den and sewing room
a single shaftlike chamber that the sound would fill.
all along, exactly as we knew it, with the organ
somewhere else. But of all the rooms downstairs,
only the den could open to the room above it.
With the ranks of pipes along the wall that
backed against the stairs, there would have been
high windows to the south and west, and possibly,
around three sides, a thin railed walk one got to
from the upstairs hall. I might let myself care
more about how well or what he played if it were
clearer to me how the organ looked. If I know
anything about its wood, I know it from the
oak-frame sliding doors between the den and
living room. So if the console had been quartered oak,
the same plain cuts as for the cabinets and counters
everywhere downstairs. How many manuals there were,
or knobs with nameplates for the pitches and the stops,
if the bench was free or fixed, or whether the
pedals for the naturals were strips that flared
the whole clear shape of it in that one place remains as
closed to me as how it worked, as the feeders and the
reservoirs, the valves, the layers of coarse felt between
the double panels of the swell-box; as how the sliders
kept the air below the upper-boards and pipes
and let it go and let it sound the way he
wanted it to sound, the wind inside the pipe
striking against a lip and coming back, contained and
vibrant for the time he kept it there. Its shock to the
air outside the pipe was how it sounded, the way he
wanted it to sound, or as it might have sounded
if the room were larger and the sounds dispersed and mixed
less palpably, went on together with the light or
between the sounds to count them to be sure that
nothing of the piece was missing. Nor was there time
for me, at any moment in the sewing room, to know
the changes that the light had worked downstairs.
Not that I would have tried to know, or done much more
walk past the stairs toward the kitchen in her busy
starting out the driveway. These were the least
obstructed windows in the house. Late in the day,
haze showed its tired agreement with the house next door,
the shingles dull and olive like the rusted screens, the
back yard on Chester. Trees as far west of us as Lake
short rows of deodars and jacarandas. At night,
from a window in the southern wall, the top three
letters on the tower for the academy kept coming on
one at a time, then all together.
[...]
Richard Arkwright was a barber. He toured the
markets and the farms and bought the hair of
country girls and made it into wigs. When he
hired John Kay to build a frame for spinning
A bunch of glads,
certainly highly emblematic of creation,
remote from frills of working blossom with hope of fruit:
slow, durable, placid,
generous, sure of kingly dreams.
All else is natural world and intellect!
Over there the mutton herds:
here friendly talents,
pushing Anna to the center of attention,
explaining her, finding a solution!
The glads offer no solution:
fulfillment
livid, tattered, or beautiful.
Grown about by fragrant bushes,
Sunken in a winding valley,
    Where the clear winds blow
    And the shadows come and go,
    And the cattle stand and low
And the sheep bells and the linnets
    Sing and tinkle musically.
Between the past and the future,
    Those two black infinities
    Between which our brief life
    Flashes a moment and goes out.

Split purple lips, lumbed ears, welts above
His yellow eyes, and one long scar that cut
Across his temple and plowed through a thick
Canopy of kinky hair.
Anymore, that the doctors had bored a hole in his head,
Cut out part of his brain, and shot electricity
Through the rest. When they brought Hard Rock back,
Handcuffed and chained, he was turned loose,
Like a freshly gelded stallion, to try his new status.
And we all waited and watched, like a herd of sheep,
To see if the WORD was true.
As we waited we wrapped ourselves in the cloak
And then the jewel of a myth that Hard Rock had once bit
A screw on the thumb and poisoned him with syphilitic spit.
The testing came, to see if Hard Rock was really tame.
A hillbilly called him a black son of a bitch
From before shook him down and barked in his face.
And Hard Rock did nothing. Just grinned and looked silly,
His eyes empty like knot holes in a fence.
And even after we discovered that it took Hard Rock
Exactly 3 minutes to tell you his first name,
We told ourselves that he had just wised up,
Was being cool; but we could not fool ourselves for long,
And we turned away, our eyes on the ground. Crushed.
He had been our Destroyer, the doer of things
We dreamed of doing but could not bring ourselves to do,
The fears of years, like a biting whip,
Had cut deep bloody grooves
Across our backs.
 His glory is my faith within,
 This day of fasting to forgive the wrong:
 His glory is my faith within.
 This day of fasting to forgive the wrong:

Of course wars, of course lice, of course limbs on opposing sides
to remind a body about ambivalence, of course orphans and empty beds and eyes
exiled for blinking in the harsh light. Of course Khrushchev gave Crimea
to the Ukraine in a blind drunk, and yes, land mines and burning skin
and of course organs, some members dismembered
to shake at strangers and their evil, and there is no way
Of course personal, add starch for pain, add bluing, of course hang
the laundry in the basement, there are thieves in the backyard, of course
departing trains, carload after carload of sorrow,
the man on top of a boxcar waving,
his rifle silhouetted against the white sky, its color draining
knowing he had reached the end of something though it was not end enough.
Of course kisses, the stages of kissing like running borders,
endless conversations, stations of the cross, till even the promise of kissing bores you,
of course teeth gnashing, ethnic cleansing. The cynical will shrug off the past,
the future, the whole left hip of Ecuador slashed for six days of oil,
of course an X on the coats of the sick so they would stand apart
for deportation, of course rogue tumors over the body politic,
the same bodies that took Egyptian mummies and powdered them
to use as food seasoning, bon vivant cannibalism,
and yes civilized men tossed living penguins into furnaces to fuel their ships.
Of course partitions so that after the new territories were defined,
families had to line up on a cliff with bullhorns
to talk to their people on the other side,
of course courage, at times a weapon against yearning, surrender another,
and a friend will say gently of course I want to ride with you to the funeral,
of course of course of course of course,
now then, negotiations, whatever,
palisades, the end of whimsy,
but then one evening though it is wartime,
a man climbs the hill to an amphitheater to play his cello at twilight
and history stops talking for a moment and sighs
while the melancholy of Albinoni
passes from heart to heart and each lifts a little,
the way passing a baby around a room can be sacramental,
and the memories of simple pleasures become more beautiful, the memory
of your joy on a highway to see in the next lane in a neighboring car
a clown take off his nose at the end of the day, the memory
of how your mother laid roses, sweetheart roses, on the cold grate of the fireplace,
and you huddled deep in your overcoat in the wet,
waiting out the storm with a sheep
that had come up to lean against your side
like a rock.
I was already an old man when I was born. 
Small with a curved back, he dragged his leg when walking
they called him. Some meant it kindly. The more one suffers
the more one acquires a sense of the comic. 
His hair rose in waves six inches above his head.
Save me, O God, from ever becoming sure. 
What good is faith if it is not irrational?
Christianity requires a conviction of sin. 
As a boy tending sheep on the frozen heath,
his starving father cursed God for his cruelty.
His fortunes changed. He grew rich and married well.
His father knew these blessings were God's punishment.
All would be stripped away. His beautiful wife died,
then five of his children. Crippled Soren survived.
The self-consuming sickness unto death is despair.
What the age needs is not a genius but a martyr.
Soren fell in love, proposed, then broke the engagement.
No one, he thought, could bear his presence daily.
My sorrow is my castle. His books were read
but ridiculed. Cartoons mocked his deformities
His private journals fill seven thousand pages.
You could read them all, he claimed, and still not know him.
He who explains this riddle explains my life.
When everyone is Christian, Christianity
does not exist. The crowd is untruth. Remember
we stand alone before God in fear and trembling.
At forty-two he collapsed on his daily walk.
Dying he seemed radiant. His skin had become
almost transparent. He refused communion
from the established church. His grave has no headstone.
Now with God's help I shall at last become myself.
dragging themselves in cute outfits through the freezer section for the semifreddo bender,
blessed innovative cloister girl pin-ups burning to know the rabbi of electricity in poverty, obedience, in the dream stick of opium and the green Wi-Fi fuse,
who marveling and cramping and wired and allergic lock themselves out of their apartments in the trenchant imperfect delight of early day,
who bared their minds to bar friends by the train in twilight and saw tiny figures like fireflies splendoring apartments Botoxed flat like canvas,
who left the university from a numbing homesickness for the rez and the old alcoholic lover family father temper crack methamphetamine birdsong,
who galvanized in excitable need and microdermabrasioned took the lonely exit ramp on the nature, constitution, and forces of matter,
who failed their enzyme multiplied immunoassay technique not once but more than once because some guy came into her room talking about publishing, hash and vintage cardigans, drunk to the abdominals looking for speed crank coke & codeine,
not allowed to explore alleys or ride the rails or hitchhike either because of the magnetic pink and with all the years of training spread out boundless the rules and safety tiresome before them,
Paradise papery Wisconsin-Madison visionary blue green crosshatched for elevation maps baked wild open unspoiled lands of Lake Kivu & Congo, ardent delirious combustible desire to go astray rove stir evolve princesslike,
who wrote letters anyway to old boyfriends before setting out on the breathless orange high desert confusion with gold carrying canvas buckets for the extra water for the car,
who talked all night in the tourist camps and were up with the sun and snappish with hunger,
the navigators in terror of the steep mountain road refreshing the radiator with water inhaling the rust steam fragrance of open road red oxygen metal and a lunar happiness,
whistlingsinging bowwowing mooing at the glamorous elations of altitude and the hayburner no handcuff no hush money open whangdoodle fiery western sky deposits of gold and silver lost stories gun-toting candlemaking dance hall prostitute stowaway freedoms not to mention ball bang bareback gamahuche cowboy,
who listened while the mechanic romanced over velocity and atonement die-stampings on sheet steel and drop forgings while the diner waitress ground out pies and pies and pies,
who saw her clothing was available in size 00 so it was time to disappear entirely,
who took a job selling print invitations to promoters where the desk was dusty with coke Aunt Mary Aunt Nora Aunt Hazel and also dust,
who took the cab to the Upper West Side to deliver the express mail package of rocks and rocks of powder for the boss in his high-ceilinged mirrored walls, comatose blonde sylph and suits of bright licorice acrylic fibers,
who watched the mistress arrayed in pelts panther drunk and ringed with minerals achieving her highest human form,
who leaving in the elevator sad at her scuffed boots of the underclass felt the mirror reflection of her mother repeating little lamb who made thee dost thou know,
who carried her infant in a baby sling she designed herself out of thrift store fabrics,
who wept because caesarean was a term for last resort, having felt cheated by the dictionary of the pain of real meaning and deliverance of child into atmosphere,
who felt the embryo always crunching futures with crushing weight of the fixed decree by which the laws of the universe are prescribed the bitch of necessity the bitch of chance and the DNA overlord,
who drove her two babies wild into the lake to what she imagined was whiteness,
who from curiosity and an old curse tried the spinning wheel in the coldest room of the castle and spilled drops of blood on the snow, fell into a sleep that would last a hundred years, until, what else, a boy kisses her,
who blonde as a lit match in Denver watched him enter and stare and took the stare not seeing yet inside the iris a splash of sweetened road that turned with pills magic grass breasts bridge rooftop roadside bedside blindside shenanigans honey,
who blonde as an aristocrat felt him watch her withhold her soft imaginative thighs while another guilty child bride tumbled sweet on a trampoline it was intoxicating,
who made cacciatore with the chickens used in the Payne Whitney Clinic trials because they were 14 cents a pound,
who tired of Sheila and the Upper East Side waiting for revolution among porcelain and jumped out/through/out the window to mainline all seven stories, literally broke the window she wanted out that much,
who imprisoned for apostasy chained up delivered the child squallish and reddening into the ballot of time,
who rode the welfare road trip of pouring innumerable thermoses of coffee, feeling the freedom wind-in-your-hair of wrapping sandwiches in wax paper,
who studied and prayed and wrote in diaries and platinumed hair gleamed gloved hands stewed rabbit in blood and wine like a priest and shot the baby out in blood over everything,
who worked stable and domestic and artful and innovative and sacrificed nothing, fig trees excitedly massively blossoming not that one that disappointed Jesus for not ripening,
who star-spangled lost in her housebound Eden cursed with orchards and a million gossipy daffodils, writing & nursing & not on the lists as he dipped a pen quite elsewhere repeatedly, crying purring the distance openmouthed,
who burned her novel this actually happened destroyed a second Bell Jar dedicated to him call her impossible but the leap from it must have been split-second maddening rapturous,
who blew him three times and then his friend because it was hard to say no when you say no nobody likes you as much when you say yes or even whatever you are loved into momentary relevance existence,
who begged twenty dollars from each friend to pay for a secret abortion, her man needing the child but not her to show his father manliness by imperialism of the womb and eventual abandonment like any suburban mall,
who sketched the body tangible medical painted portraits and lived inside,
who gave a light touch delicate hand beautiful chisel cheek blonde wave Mother Image Madwoman chick and ignu driving inward toward an isolated, lonely peace,
who hid his shoes hating to but still he left her for Colt 45 malt liquor Johnnie Walker Falstaff Beer,
and lived the biography filled however with biographies of the others for which she made a home flashbulbed in silver their likenesses and tried love in living room, attic, slanted redeemable love their fingers articulated like saints,
and who therefore know the biology of the soft matter and the cluster of creation in its salty stellar lonely archive is matched by the sweet violence of thought,
who transubstantiated across the desert with both of them finally under the deep clear her blonde beauty and the celestial betrayals arrayed stellar, Andromeda chained naked to a rock, the Pleiades shedding to doves to stars,
with blooming, ridiculous with blooming, arriving and opening in endless profusion forever.
here. Have been for centuries. No, longer. Everything already has
here again I put the olive trees in, turn the whole hill-sweeping grove down, its
mile-long headfuls of leaves upswept so the whole valley shivers its windy silvers,
watery ... A strange heat is upon us. Again. That was you thinking that. I suggested it.
Maybe the wind did. We both put in the horizon line now, the great loneliness, its
grip, chaos recessed but still there. After finitude you shall keep coming toward me
it whines, whitish with non-disappearance. We feel the same about this. The same
front of us. Receding, always receding. A vanishing moving over it all. A sleepy
a mind alone in the fields. The sheep riding and falling the slants of earth. The
sleepiness a no-good god come to assume we are halfwits, tending, sleepy, the
animals gurgling and trampling, thistle-choked, stinging. A dove on a stone. No sky
to speak of, the god lingers, it wants to retire, it thinks this is endgame, what
random. This must have been way BC. Or is it 1944. Surely in 2044 we shall be
standing in the field again, tending, waiting to surprise the god who thinks he knows
these flocks of minutes, whispering till the timelessness in us is wrung dry and we
are heavied with endgame. Have I mentioned the soul. How we know you hustled
that in, staining all this flesh with it, rubbing and swirling it all over inside with
green, day smacks its lips, they are back, the inventors, they are going to do it
again, sprinkle-seed, joker rain coming to loosen it all. How many lives will we be
crows watch over it all as they always have, come back from the end of time to caw
it into its redo again. Cherish us. Will not stop. Nothing to show for it but doing. The
flock runs across as the dog chases and I walk slowly. I admire what I own what I am
and I think the night is nothing, the stars click their ascent, I feel it rise in me, the
word, I feel the skull beneath this skin, I feel the skin slick and shine and hide the
That story which the bold Sir Bedivere, 
First made and latest left of all the knights, 
Told, when the man was no more than a voice 
In the white winter of his age, to those 
With whom he dwelt, new faces, other minds. 
Who slowly paced among the slumbering host, 
Heard in his tent the moanings of the King: 
I mark'd Him in the flowering of His fields, 
But in His ways with men I find Him not. 
I waged His wars, and now I pass and die. 
O me! for why is all around us here 
As if some lesser god had made the world, 
But had not force to shape it as he would, 
Till the High God behold it from beyond, 
And enter it, and make it beautiful? 
Or else as if the world were wholly fair, 
But that these eyes of men are dense and dim, 
And have not power to see it as it is: 
For I, being simple, thought to work His will, 
And have but stricken with the sword in vain; 
And all whereon I lean'd in wife and friend 
Is traitor to my peace, and all my realm 
Reels back into the beast, and is no more. 
My God, thou hast forgotten me in my death: 
There came on Arthur sleeping, Gawain kill'd 
In Lancelot's war, the ghost of Gawain blown 
Along a wandering wind, and past his ear 
Went shrilling, "Hollow, hollow all delight! 
Hail, King! to-morrow thou shalt pass away. 
Farewell! there is an isle of rest for thee. 
And I am blown along a wandering wind, 
And hollow, hollow, hollow all delight." 
And fainter onward, like wild birds that change 
Their season in the night and wail their way 
From cloud to cloud, down the long wind the dream 
Shrill'd; but in going mingled with dim cries 
Far in the moonlit haze among the hills, 
As of some lonely city sack'd by night, 
When all is lost, and wife and child with wail 
Pass to new lords; and Arthur woke and call'd, 
"Who spake? A dream. O light upon the wind, 
Thine? or doth all that haunts the waste and wild 
Mourn, knowing it will go along with me?" 
"O me, my King, let pass whatever will, 
Elves, and the harmless glamour of the field; 
But in their stead thy name and glory cling 
To all high places like a golden cloud 
For ever: but as yet thou shalt not pass. 
Light was Gawain in life, and light in death 
Is Gawain, for the ghost is as the man; 
I hear the steps of Modred in the west, 
And with him many of thy people, and knights 
Once thine, whom thou hast loved, but grosser grown 
Than heathen, spitting at their vows and thee. 
Right well in heart they know thee for the King. 
Arise, go forth and conquer as of old." 
"Far other is this battle in the west 
Whereto we move, than when we strove in youth, 
And brake the petty kings, and fought with Rome, 
Or thrust the heathen from the Roman wall, 
And shook him thro' the north. Ill doom is mine 
To war against my people and my knights. 
The king who fights his people fights himself. 
And they my knights, who loved me once, the stroke 
That strikes them dead is as my death to me. 
Yet let us hence, and find or feel a way 
Thro' this blind haze, which ever since I saw 
One lying in the dust at Almesbury, 
Hath folded in the passes of the world." 
And ever push'd Sir Modred, league by league, 
A land of old upheaven from the abyss 
By fire, to sink into the abyss again; 
Where fragments of forgotten peoples dwelt, 
And the long mountains ended in a coast 
Of ever-shifting sand, and far away 
The phantom circle of a moaning sea. 
There the pursuer could pursue no more, 
And he that fled no further fly the King; 
And there, that day when the great light of heaven 
Burn'd at his lowest in the rolling year, 
On the waste sand by the waste sea they closed. 
Nor ever yet had Arthur fought a fight 
Like this last, dim, weird battle of the west. 
A deathwhite mist slept over sand and sea: 
Whereof the chill, to him who breathed it, drew 
Down with his blood, till all his heart was cold 
With formless fear; and ev'n on Arthur fell 
Confusion, since he saw not whom he fought. 
For friend and foe were shadows in the mist, 
And friend slew friend not knowing whom he slew; 
And some had visions out of golden youth, 
And some beheld the faces of old ghosts 
Look in upon the battle; and in the mist 
Was many a noble deed, many a base, 
And chance and craft and strength in single fights, 
And ever and anon with host to host 
Shocks, and the splintering spear, the hard mail hewn, 
Shield-breakings, and the clash of brands, the crash 
Of battleaxes on shatter'd helms, and shrieks 
After the Christ, of those who falling down 
Look'd up for heaven, and only saw the mist; 
And shouts of heathen and the traitor knights, 
Oaths, insult, filth, and monstrous blasphemies, 
Sweat, writhings, anguish, labouring of the lungs 
In that close mist, and cryings for the light, 
Moans of the dying, and voices of the dead. 
Of suffering, silence follows, or thro' death 
Or deathlike swoon, thus over all that shore, 
Save for some whisper of the seething seas, 
A dead hush fell; but when the dolorous day 
Grew drearier toward twilight falling, came 
A bitter wind, clear from the North, and blew 
The mist aside, and with that wind the tide 
Rose, and the pale King glanced across the field 
Of battle: but no man was moving there; 
Nor any cry of Christian heard thereon, 
Nor yet of heathen; only the wan wave 
Brake in among dead faces, to and fro 
Swaying the helpless hands, and up and down 
Tumbling the hollow helmets of the fallen, 
And shiver'd brands that once had fought with Rome, 
And rolling far along the gloomy shores 
The voice of days of old and days to be. 
And whiter than the mist that all day long 
Had held the field of battle was the King: 
And wastes the narrow realm whereon we move, 
And beats upon the faces of the dead, 
O Bedivere, for on my heart hath fall'n 
Confusion, till I know not what I am, 
Nor whence I am, nor whether I be King. 
Behold, I seem but King among the dead." 
King everywhere! and so the dead have kings, 
There also will I worship thee as King. 
Yet still thy life is whole, and still I live 
Who love thee; but who hates thee, he that brought 
The heathen back among us, yonder stands, 
Modred, unharm'd, the traitor of thine house." 
But call not thou this traitor of my house 
Who hath but dwelt beneath one roof with me. 
My house are rather they who sware my vows, 
Yea, even while they brake them, own'd me King. 
And well for thee, saying in my dark hour, 
When all the purport of my throne hath fail'd, 
That quick or dead thou hottest me for King. 
King am I, whatsoever be their cry; 
And one last act of kinghood shalt thou see 
Yet, ere I pass." And uttering this the King 
Made at the man: then Modred smote his liege 
Hard on that helm which many a heathen sword 
Had beaten thin; while Arthur at one blow, 
Striking the last stroke with Excalibur, 
Slew him, and all but slain himself, he fell. 
Among the mountains by the winter sea; 
Until King Arthur's Table, man by man, 
Had fall'n in Lyonnesse about their lord, 
King Arthur. Then, because his wound was deep, 
The bold Sir Bedivere uplifted him, 
And bore him to a chapel nigh the field, 
A broken chancel with a broken cross, 
That stood on a dark strait of barren land: 
On one side lay the Ocean, and on one 
Lay a great water, and the moon was full. 
"The sequel of to-day unsolders all 
The goodliest fellowship of famous knights 
Whereof this world holds record. Such a sleep 
Shall never more, at any future time, 
Delight our souls with talk of knightly deeds, 
On the journey to the mundane afterlife, 
You travel equipped to carry on your trade: 
A bronze, small-toothed saw to make repairs, 
The stylus and the ink pot and the scraper, 
Wax tablets bound into a little book. 
Here is the tortoise shell for the cithara, 
Bored through with holes for strings, natural sound box. 
The sheep-gut having long since decomposed 
Into a pure Pythagorean music. 
The beeswax, frangible with centuries, 
Has puzzled all your lyrics into silence. 
I think you were a poet of perfection 
Who fled still weighing one word with another, 
Since wax forgives and warms beneath revision.
When snow like sheep lay in the fold
And winds went begging at each door,
And the far hills were blue with cold,
And a cold shroud lay on the moor,
She kept the siege. And every day
We watched her brooding over death
Like a strong bird above its prey.
Damp curtains glued against the pane
Sealed time away. Her body froze
As if to freeze us all, and chain
Creation to a stunned repose.
She died before the world could stir.
In March the ice unloosed the brook
Dead cones upon the alder shook.
In their excess, their blowsy dreaming
and King Solomon-like tempers, the clouds
possess the grandeur of eighteenth-century oils,
when a painter earned his profession
as an anatomist. Those artists of verdigris 
and gamboge, too gorged on joy, perhaps,
like something that had lived. 
Their crawly undoings remind us
half-remembered boil, or a few twisted bolls 
or sunset a dull, worn-out gilt.
The nights there were scumbled with light.
How could we ever have taken them
for the abstinence of art?
CHORUS 
Come we shepherds whose blest sight 
Come lift we up our loftier song 
And wake the sun that lies too long. 
Tell him he rises now too late 
To show us aught worth looking at. 
Tell him we now can show him more 
It was thy day, Sweet! and did rise 
Not from the east, but from thine eyes. 
It was thy day, Sweet! and did rise 
Not from the east, but from thine eyes. 
Winter chid aloud, and sent 
The North forgot his fierce intent, 

We saw thee in thy balmy nest, 
We saw thine eyes break from their east 
We saw thee by thine own sweet light. 
Poor World, said I, what wilt thou do 
Is this the best thou canst bestow, 
To fit a bed for this huge birth. 
To fit a bed for this huge birth. 
Proud World, said I, cease your contest, 
The Babe whose birth embraves this morn, 
Made his own bed ere he was born. 
The Babe whose birth embraves this morn, 
Made his own bed ere he was born. 
Forbear, said I, be not too bold; 
Forbear, said I, be not too bold; 
I saw the obsequious Seraphims 
For well they now can spare their wings, 
Well done, said I, but are you sure 
Your down so warm will pass for pure? 
Well done, said I, but are you sure 
Your down so warm will pass for pure? 
Sweet choice, said we! no way but so, 
Not to lie cold, yet sleep in snow. 
Sweet choice, said we! no way but so, 
Not to lie cold, yet sleep in snow. 
We saw thee in thy balmy nest, 
We saw thine eyes break from their east, 
We saw thee, by thine own sweet light. 
We saw thee, by thine own sweet light. 
Welcome, all wonders in one sight! 
Summer in winter; day in night; 
Great little one, whose all-embracing birth 
Welcome; though nor to gold nor silk, 
Two sister seas of virgin-milk, 
That breathes at once both maid and mother, 
Warms in the one, cools in the other. 
Welcome, though not to those gay flies 
Slippery souls in smiling eyes; 
Well read in their simplicity. 
To thee, dread Lamb! whose love must keep 
The shepherds more than they the sheep. 
To thee, meek Majesty! soft King 
Each of us his lamb will bring, 
Till burnt at last in fire of thy fair eyes, 
Ourselves become our own best sacrifice.
I
Far-sighted into yesterday
they stand, gripping
their charters and speeches,
the presidents and kings,
masters of unconscious evil.
judges, robed executioners,
steely and triumphant.
And stunned at their feet,
the beheaded, the betrayed,
healed and hallowed now
in this grave sorrow of wax.

We enter, adjust to the gloom,
to the lighting that plays
on the painted, staring faces.
We think to ourselves, murmur
to the one standing beside us:
"How compellingly strange
these people are, and yet familiar
to the world we left behind us,
the street and the household..."
These are the people whose names
we learned, whose lives we studied,
whose thoughts we have become.
Each lighted stage with its play
comedians and stuntmen,
heroes transfixed in purpose.
We pause, to read once more,
in deliberate, bald summation,
what art, wax, and history
have made of the dead:
something more than a mirror,
less than a telling likeness;
an ideality slick with blood.

How easily in the live heat
of truth and summer
these actors wilt and perish.
Henry of Church and England
is here, savage and senile,
still laced in his armor;
his lopped and stunted wives
stand grouped around him.
Bismark in his iron corset,
endlessly dividing Europe;
Wilhelm, that struttng dwarf,
abject in abdication.
And here, the fatal mischief
how long a burning, came
of the Archduke's festive ride,
his shot and bloodied tunic.
And no more telling prophecy
in the wake of armistice
than that one dated cartoon
with its hooded sentry
and its graveyard owl:
"It has been six years..."
How easily a puff of smoke,
a square of burnt cloth,
a shocked cry, can change
the world, and leave it
neither worse nor better.

Here is a man, thief or martyr,
hanged at Damascus Gate
with a hook through his gut.
He swung, seared by the sun
and kissed by the night.
And maybe one of the market
women brought him water,
by the Sultan's watch,
she might have lost her hands.
As in the time of Richelieu,
certain men the crown accused
were exposed in iron baskets
like plucked birds.
They fouled their nests,
starved and blackened until
they died; and the city lived
with their cries, their rank
mortality, night and day.
The hook is black and crescent,
the body swings, inert,
as if asleep and dreaming.
The guidebook tells us the man
survived his hook and lived;
it doesn't say how long.

Here, with his tins and furs,
is Minuit, buying Manhattan.
the Indians' foolish feathers.
He takes their land, and they
his bitter gifts, his brass
in place of an earthy kingdom.
Wolfe, Montcalm, on the plain
below Quebec: the one dying,
the other condemned to follow.
We pass, reading from face to face,
from book to book, uneasy
that among these celebrations
so many rigged transactions
have gone unquestioned.
And all our wigged colonials,
our Franklins, conspiring
with their strongbox keys
that so much ink and dust
and shuffled paper conceals
their tidy pilferings,
their purity and blunted wrath.
Were there rooms in this house,
each with its tabled motions
and false partitions
might furnish a history,
one slow truth at a time.
But never in our late arrival
have we stilled confusion,
to learn how great a folly
follows in the wake of fathers.
From their deliberate violence
we come to our own lamed
To Ike, to Kennedy and Ford,
golfers and temporizers;
to perennial candidate Nixon,
whose cheek was never turned.
Out of his sleek arrest
he steps towards us,
a fixed, ferocious smile
on the blue jowls
brushed with powder.

Nothing we have painted
neither prayer nor courtship,
nor solace of sleep
of these iron centuries.
Here, in a row of lighted
cases, a few artifacts
are on display. No comfort
to us now in that familiar,
edged interrogation...
But the biting persuasion
of chains and collars,
of inching racks, fire tongs
In the energy crisis my city has turned to burning angel skins. 
I read by their light, a book of elegies. 
A fruit fly lands on Amichai, I slap him flat 
Against the page. Now it is an elegy for him, as well, 
And his tomb. And I am a terrible, toothless god,
Stringing blades of grass between the tongues of sheep.
Ash of angel fire drifts over my head, falls in my coffee. 
O Holy, Holy, Holy indigestion.
I bribe the coming day with open windows
And freshly washed underwear
Hung out on the clothesline,
Slipping hastily over the hips of winds.
The winds know, all you have to do is
Open your mouth, the flies will come.
to put trumpet flowers under my pillow,  
I do: stamen up, the old crone said.  
But the pollen stains, and there are bees,  
I swear, in those long yellow chambers, echoing,  
I try floating out along the long O of lone,  
to where it flattens to loss, and just stay there  
disconnecting the dots of my night sky  
as one would take apart a house made of sticks,  
carefully, last addition to first,  
like sheep leaping backward into their pens.
Lazy laughing languid Jenny,
Fond of a kiss and fond of a guinea,
Whose head upon my knee to-night
Rests for a while, as if grown light
With all our dances and the sound
To which the wild tunes spun you round:
Fair Jenny mine, the thoughtless queen
Of kisses which the blush between
Could hardly make much daintier;
Whose eyes are as blue skies, whose hair
Is countless gold incomparable:
Fresh flower, scarce touched with signs that tell
Poor flower left torn since yesterday
Until to-morrow leave you bare;
Poor handful of bright spring-water
Poor shameful Jenny, full of grace
Whose person or whose purse may be
The lodestar of your reverie?
  This room of yours, my Jenny, looks
A change from mine so full of books,
Whose serried ranks hold fast, forsooth,
The hours they thieve from day and night
And leave it wrong for all their theft,
Even as to-night my work has left:
Until I vowed that since my brain
And eyes of dancing seemed so fain,
And thus it was I met with you.
For here I am. And now, sweetheart,
You seem too tired to get to bed.
  It was a careless life I led
When rooms like this were scarce so strange
The many aims or the few years?
Because to-night it all appears
Something I do not know again.
The cloud that made it turn and swim
While hour by hour the books grew dim.
For all your wealth of loosened hair,
And warm sweets open to the waist,
You know not what a book you seem,
Half-read by lightning in a dream!
How should you know, my Jenny? Nay,
Poor beauty, so well worth a kiss!
But while my thought runs on like this
With wasteful whims more than enough,
  If of myself you think at all,
Or inly is each grace revolved
And let you rest upon my knee.
Glad from the crush to rest within,
From the heart-sickness and the din
Mocks you because your gown is rich;
Whose ill-clad grace and toil-worn look
Proclaim the strength that keeps her weak,
And other nights than yours bespeak;
And from the wise unchildish elf,
To schoolmate lesser than himself
Yes, from the daily jeer and jar,
But most from the hatefulness of man
Who spares not to end what he began,
Whose acts are ill and his speech ill,
Who, having used you at his will,
Thrusts you aside, as when I dine
I serve the dishes and the wine. 
  Well, handsome Jenny mine, sit up:
And do not let me think of you,
Lest shame of yours suffice for two.
What, still so tired? Well, well then, keep
Your head there, so you do not sleep;
But that the weariness may pass
And leave you merry, take this glass.
  Behold the lilies of the field,
They toil not neither do they spin;
Not of such rest as one of these
Can share.) Another rest and ease.
Along each summer-sated path
From its new lord the garden hath,
Than that whose spring in blessings ran
Which praised the bounteous husbandman,
Ere yet, in days of hankering breath,
The lilies sickened unto death.
  What, Jenny, are your lilies dead?
Aye, and the snow-white leaves are spread
Like winter on the garden-bed.
They were not gone too. Jenny, nay,
But must your roses die, and those
Their purfled buds that should unclose?
Even so; the leaves are curled apart,
Still red as from the broken heart,
  Nay, nay mere words. Here nothing warns
As yet of winter. Sickness here
Nothing but passion wrings a tear.
Except when there may rise unsought
Haply at times a passing thought
Of the old days which seem to be 
Much older than any history
That is written in any book;
When she would lie in fields and look
Along the ground through the blown grass,
And wonder where the city was,
Far out of sight, whose broil and bale
  Jenny, you know the city now,
A child can tell the tale there, how
In market-lists are bought and sold
Even till the early Sunday light,
When Saturday night is market-night
Everywhere, be it dry or wet,
And market-night in the Haymarket.
Our learned London children know,
Poor Jenny, all your pride and woe;
Have seen your lifted silken skirt
Advertise dainties through the dirt;
Have seen your coach-wheels splash rebuke
On virtue; and have learned your look
When, wealth and health slipped past, you stare
Along the streets alone, and there,
Round the long park, across the bridge,
Wind on together and apart,
A fiery serpent for your heart.
  Let the thoughts pass, an empty cloud!
What if to her all this were said?
Why, as a volume seldom read
Being opened halfway shuts again,
So might the pages of her brain
Be parted at such words, and thence
Close back upon the dusty sense.
Where all contagious currents meet,
A Lethe of the middle street?
Nay, it reflects not any face,
Nor sound is in its sluggish pace,
But as they coil those eddies clot,
And night and day remembers not.
So young and soft and tired; so fair,
With chin thus nestled in your hair,
Mouth quiet, eyelids almost blue
As if some sky of dreams shone through!
  Just as another woman sleeps!
Of the same lump (it has been said)
For honour and dishonour made,
Two sister vessels. Here is one.
  My cousin Nell is fond of fun,
And fond of dress, and change, and praise,
So mere a woman in her ways:
For I will consider my black sow Blackula.
For she is the servant of the god of the feed bucket and serveth him.
For she worships the god in him and the secret of his pail in her way.
For this is done by screams of incantation at the appointed hour and lusty bites of daily communion.
For she stands with forelegs upon the top rail of the wooden fence in supplication.
For she grunts her thanks while she eats.
For she stands for the red boar with closed eyes at the appointed hour.
For having done she lies in the mud to consider herself.
For this she performs in ten degrees.
For first she rolls in her wallow to cover her body.
For secondly she lies still to feel the wet.
For thirdly she stretches her length and casts her belly to the sun.
For fifthly she rises and examines her feed trough that replenishment might miraculously appear.
For sixthly she scratches her side against the fence.
For seventhly she scratches her jowl with delicate pastern swipe.
For ninthly she returns to her mud and plows large holes in the earth.
For tenthly she lies again in the wallow to cool her frame.
For having considered her world she will sleep and dream dreams of herself and her god and the red boar.
For like Eve for softness she and sweet attractive Grace was formed.
For the red boar lusteth mightily and foameth at the mouth for her.
For he might escape and enter her pen.
For if he does this in a nonappointed hour she will scream loudly and discourage his kisses.
For her belly is full and needeth no more.
For in one month she will bring forth life in abundance.
For in her last litter she farrowed eight piglets of the red boar.
For three were black and five were red.
For she raised them all and laid on none.
For one in eight is normally crushed by the sow.
For she is exceedingly good in all that she does.
For she is surely of the tribe of Elephant and forgetteth not.
For she weighs near six hundred pounds.
For she has ears of tremendous size.
For she is heavy.
For a large sow is a term of the Titan Elephant.
For she has the appetite of a bird and would eat the day long which in debt her master suppresses.
For he would not have her too fat or his checkbook hollow.
For he keeps her well-fed and she breaks no fence.
For she grunts in pleasure from the mud when he scratches her ears.
For she is a tool of God to temper his mind.
For her master is provoked but hereby learns patience.
For she is an instrument for him to learn bankruptcy upon.
For he lost but four dollars each on the last litter of pigs.
For this is admirable in the world of the bank.
For every man is incomplete without one serious debt or loss.
For she provides this with her good faith.
For every farm is a skeleton without a mortgage.
For the Lord admonished black sows when he said lay up no stores of treasure on earth.
For she prohibits this daily.
For she is a true child of God and creature of the universe.
For she is called Blackula which is a derivative of the Devil, but false.
For she does worship her God and Savior.
For when Jan came with a stick and wrath she lifted her head and smiled.
For her teeth and mouth were stained with red beet pulp.
For Jan dropped the stick and laughed.
For she looked like a six-hundred-pound vampire.
For she was called Blackula.
For we feed her red beets daily to watch her smile.
For she is humble when well-fed.
For she makes her point well when she is hungry.
For there is nothing swifter than a sow breaking fence when she desires.
For there is nothing more beautiful than a sow in full run when being chased through a garden.
For there is no sound more pure than her scream when she is hit with a stick.
For she is meek in all aspects when satisfied.
For when John Sims saw her lying in mud he proclaimed her majesty.
For he whistled and called her a pretty sonofabitch.
For he offered to trade his beat-up truck for her straight across.
For she has divine spirit and is manifest as a complete pig.
For she is tame and can be taught.
For she can run and walk and sleep and drink and eat.
For she can scream at the red boar.
For she allows her ears and belly to be scratched.
For she allows small children to ride her back.
For she sleeps in mounds of straw at night.
For she produces litters of healthy black and red pigs.
For she can root the earth.
For she can carry sticks in her mouth.
For she will grunt when she is addressed.
For she can jump not far but hard.
For dried earth cracks in the places where she walks.
For she is hated by the breeders of cattle and sheep.
For the former loses more money than I do on his stock.
For the latter fears her mind.
For she has no wool and will not blindly follow his steps.
For he carries no bucket of feed.
For she litters twice per year.
For he litters but once.
For her belly is firm and can take much abuse.
For from this proceeds her worth.
For I felt tiny lumps of flesh within and knew they were alive.
For the life is the physical substance which God sends from Heaven to sustain the appetites of men.
For they multiply in ecstasy at the appointed time.
For God has blessed her in many ways.
For God has given her the red beets to eat.
For God has given the water for her to drink.
For God has allowed the water to run to mud in a place for her to lay.
For she cannot fly to the mountain streams, though she walks well upon the earth.
For she walks the earth heavy upon tiny feet.
For she treads all the rows of the summer garden.
For she can jump the fence.
For she can push it down.
For she can eat.
Pitch here the tent, while the old horse grazes:
     By the old hedge-side we'll halt a stage.
It's nigh my last above the daisies:
     My next leaf'll be man's blank page.
Yes, my old girl! and it's no use crying:
     Juggler, constable, king, must bow.
One that outjuggles all's been spying
     Long to have me, and he has me now.
We've travelled times to this old common:
     Often we've hung our pots in the gorse.
We've had a stirring life, old woman!
     You, and I, and the old grey horse.
Races, and fairs, and royal occasions,
     Found us coming to their call:
Now they'll miss us at our stations:
     There's a Juggler outjuggles all!
Up goes the lark, as if all were jolly!
     Over the duck-pond the willow shakes.
Easy to think that grieving's folly,
     When the hand's firm as driven stakes!
Ay, when we're strong, and braced, and manful,
     Life's a sweet fiddle: but we're a batch
Born to become the Great Juggler's han'ful:
     Balls he shies up, and is safe to catch.
Here's where the lads of the village cricket:
     I was a lad not wide from here:
Couldn't I whip off the bale from the wicket?
     Like an old world those days appear!
     They are old friends of my halts, and seem,
Somehow, as if kind thanks I owe them:
     Juggling don't hinder the heart's esteem.
Juggling's no sin, for we must have victual:
     Nature allows us to bait for the fool.
Holding one's own makes us juggle no little;
     But, to increase it, hard juggling's the rule.
You that are sneering at my profession,
     Haven't you juggled a vast amount?
There's the Prime Minister, in one Session,
     Juggles more games than my sins'll count.
I've murdered insects with mock thunder:
     Conscience, for that, in men don't quail.
I've made bread from the bump of wonder:
     That's my business, and there's my tale.
Fashion and rank all praised the professor:
     Ay! and I've had my smile from the Queen:
Bravo, Jerry! she meant: God bless her!
     Ain't this a sermon on that scene?
I've studied men from my topsy-turvy
     Close, and, I reckon, rather true.
Some are fine fellows: some, right scurvy:
     Most, a dash between the two.
But it's a woman, old girl, that makes me
     Think more kindly of the race:
And it's a woman, old girl, that shakes me
     When the Great Juggler I must face.
We two were married, due and legal:
     Honest we've lived since we've been one.
Lord! I could then jump like an eagle:
     You danced bright as a bit o' the sun.
Birds in a May-bush we were! right merry!
     All night we kiss'd, we juggled all day.
Joy was the heart of Juggling Jerry!
     Now from his old girl he's juggled away.
It's past parsons to console us:
     No, nor no doctor fetch for me:
I can die without my bolus;
     Two of a trade, lass, never agree!
     Fighting the devil in other men's fields!
Stand up yourself and match him fairly:
     Then see how the rascal yields!
I, lass, have lived no gipsy, flaunting
     Finery while his poor helpmate grubs:
Coin I've stored, and you won't be wanting:
     You shan't beg from the troughs and tubs.
Nobly you've stuck to me, though in his kitchen
     Many a Marquis would hail you Cook!
Palaces you could have ruled and grown rich in,
     But your old Jerry you never forsook.
Hand up the chirper! ripe ale winks in it;
     Let's have comfort and be at peace.
Once a stout draught made me light as a linnet.
     Cheer up! the Lord must have his lease.
     It's just a place where we're held in pawn,
And, when the Great Juggler makes as to swallow,
Yonder came smells of the gorse, so nutty,
     Gold-like and warm: it's the prime of May.
Better than mortar, brick and putty
     Is God's house on a blowing day.
Lean me more up the mound; now I feel it:
     All the old heath-smells! Ain't it strange?
There's the world laughing, as if to conceal it,
     But He's by us, juggling the change.
I mind it well, by the sea-beach lying,
Which, as the moon got up, were flying
     Down a big wave that sparked and swell'd.
Crack, went a gun: one fell: the second
     Wheeled round him twice, and was off for new luck:

The young Endymion sleeps Endymion's sleep; 
The nightingale is singing from the steep; 
Lo! in the moonlight gleams a marble white, 
Of his sweet singing? Rather let me write: 

I found Rome in the woods.
tundra to the west in the park, past Toklat
the Denali I revised, low grasslands
engineered to freeze deep

too many spots
soaked in unpronounceable Latin.
expletives of cheap wonder all over
and expanse.
by a raven!
Something perverse about that.
Something perfectly fiendishly self-conscious about that.
From the start perverse, any premise.

The Alaska Range dreams lurid as Rome,
way below being fire, summer snow at night
of a hand if I
to know how this works. Some have the power to
raise from the dead a before, before
scary and beautiful
far under a Roman street, the altar to
Mithras still slaying his bull, crumbling the stonework.

such a wily courtly lot.

for an undersong.
Look it up! Undersong: a strain; a droning;
common denominator
is contagious. Rome or Denali,
a mash-up of lunge and cry out, predator
and prey throwing coins to a fountain,
footholds made first by a hoof,
pickpockets at buses and trains, nuns
queuing up their no-nonsense, thorny brambles,
raggedy spruce groves,
love on the street, a chain of mountains in
choral repeat, saints
stained to glass, how ice gouged rivers
from rock-bound,
common-sense Pope
all outstretched arms, his little popemobile circling
up on our rickety chairs to see in six, seven languages
And Keats,
Keats is coughing.
You find the fossil record everywhere. In woods,
tundra, under streets, in cadaver labs.
wistful orderly page after page in
biology, a lie, a kind of flip-book romance.
in us, the generous extraordinary dead prove that,
signing a paper, giving themselves away
the knowing it,
sunk to their chemical depth in some afterlife, opened
on a table by kids really,
shabby shared wilderness to untangle,
in hand, weirdest
how-to book on the planet. For Keats too, 1819, his
scribbled roses and sunflowers in margins,
looking down and later: still
London, then Rome (he who gets it,
my heart anymore.
than the hopelessly confused misnamed
English sparrow, descendant of the great weaver birds
of Africa, a finch that lost the gene
precise, bringing bringing
sticks and hair and bits of shiny paper.
Undersong: the burden of a song.
muddled middle of it. I watched
who made claims about beauty and time.
His bed at the last
I admit: a ridiculous layering, Rome in Denali.
Just because? Because I went to both in short order?
Two continents, an ocean apart. My mother
never the twain shall meet.
They do meet.
Happenstance and right now drag along
future and past
the Denali, the Rome in any of us, no two
states of being more
unalike, worn-out compulsion
to collect and harbor, piece together,
some remember machine.
to merge or unmake: the trash compactor,
a point that keeps breaking, wilderness gone inward as
to Canterbury to blood-up
fields into legend then dig the first plumbing but
Brilliance is a carcass 
on a snow-white beach. 
Envy never sleeps. 
I tell my children truthfully: 
a long red beard is breaking 
from the darkness scale. 

and sees the town in dirty tones: 
violet sheep and wine-dark 
corn. He burns the evening 
rainbow like a wartime bridge 

by capturing the ledge 
and chattering like X-rays 
that crash into your flesh.
Go there anymore, I want to at times, to hear the diction 
What else could unite widows, bankers, children, and ghosts? 
And those faces are so good as they tilt their smiles upward 
To the rostrum that represents law, and the minister who 
Represents God beams like the white palm of the good hand 
Of Christ raised behind the baptistry to signal the multitude, 
Which I am not among, though I feel the abundance of calm 
And know the beatitude so well I do not have to imagine it, 
Or the polite old ones who gather after the service to chat, 
Or the ritual linen of Sunday tables that are already set. 
More than any other days, Sundays stand in unvarying rows 
That beg attention: there is that studied verisimilitude 
Of sanctuary, so even mud and bitten weeds look dressed up 
For some eye in the distant past, some remote kingdom 
Where the pastures are crossed by thoroughly symbolic rivers. 
That is why the syntax of prayers is so often reversed, 
Aimed toward the dead who clearly have not gone ahead 
But returned to prior things, a vista of angels and sheep, 
A desert where men in robes and sandals gather by a tree. 
I recognized it, waking up, before I weighed the bulk of news 
And though I had no prayer, I wanted to offer something 
Or ask for something, perhaps out of habit, but as the past 
Must always be honored unconsciously, formally, and persists 
On this first and singular day, though I think of it as last.
In this lone, open glade I lie,
Screen'd by deep boughs on either hand;
And at its end, to stay the eye,
Those black-crown'd, red-boled pine-trees stand!
Birds here make song, each bird has his,
Across the girdling city's hum.
How green under the boughs it is!
How thick the tremulous sheep-cries come!
Sometimes a child will cross the glade
To take his nurse his broken toy;
Sometimes a thrush flit overhead
Deep in her unknown day's employ.
Here at my feet what wonders pass,
What endless, active life is here!
What blowing daisies, fragrant grass!
An air-stirr'd forest, fresh and clear.
Scarce fresher is the mountain-sod
Where the tired angler lies, stretch'd out,
And, eased of basket and of rod,
Counts his day's spoil, the spotted trout.
In the huge world, which roars hard by,
Be others happy if they can!
But in my helpless cradle I
Was breathed on by the rural Pan.
I, on men's impious uproar hurl'd,
Think often, as I hear them rave,
That peace has left the upper world
And now keeps only in the grave.
Yet here is peace for ever new!
When I who watch them am away,
Still all things in this glade go through
The changes of their quiet day.
Then to their happy rest they pass!
The flowers upclose, the birds are fed,
The night comes down upon the grass,
The child sleeps warmly in his bed.
Calm soul of all things! make it mine
To feel, amid the city's jar,
That there abides a peace of thine,
Man did not make, and cannot mar.
The will to neither strive nor cry,
The power to feel with others give!
Calm, calm me more! nor let me die
Before I have begun to live.

Little Bo-Peep has lost her sheep,
And can't tell where to find them;
Leave them alone, and they'll come home,
Bringing their tails behind them.
Little Bo-Peep fell fast asleep,
And dreamt she heard them bleating;
But when she awoke, she found it a joke,
For they were still all fleeting.
Then up she took her little crook,
Determined for to find them;
She found them indeed, but it made her heart bleed,
For they'd left their tails behind them.
It happened one day, as Bo-Peep did stray
Into a meadow hard by,
There she espied their tails, side by side,
All hung on a tree to dry.
She heaved a sigh and wiped her eye,
And over the hillocks she raced;
And tried what she could, as a shepherdess should,
That each tail be properly placed.
Little boy blue,
Come blow your horn,
The sheep's in the meadow,
The cow's in the corn.
But where is the boy
Who looks after the sheep?
He's under a haystack,
Fast asleep.
Little Boy Blue,
please cover your nose.
and ruined her clothes.
You sprayed Mother Hubbard,
and now she is sick.
why Humpty fell down.
You drenched Yankee Doodle
when he came to town.
The blind mice are angry!
The sheep are upset!
From now on use tissues
so no one gets wet!
At hawthorn-time in Wiltshire travelling
In search of something chance would never bring,
When I had left him many a mile behind.
A footpath, right enough. You see those bits
Sixty years since, while I was scaring sparrows.
They thought as there was something to find there,
To turn back then and seek him, where was the use?
And whether Alton, not Manningford, it was,
My memory could not decide, because
There was both Alton Barnes and Alton Priors.
All had their churches, graveyards, farms, and byres,
Lurking to one side up the paths and lanes,
Seldom well seen except by aeroplanes;
Then only heard. Ages ago the road
Approached. The people stood and looked and turned.
Nor asked it to come nearer, nor yet learned
If they had reaped their dandelions and sold
Them fairly, they could have afforded gold.
Many years passed, and I went back again
Among those villages, and looked for men
Who might have known my ancient. He himself
Had long been dead or laid upon the shelf,
I thought. One man I asked about him roared
It was Jack Button up at the White Horse.
Who loved wild bird and beast, and dog and gun
For killing them. He had loved them from his birth,
One with another, as he loved the earth.
Like Bottlesford, that you want, but far more
He sounds like one I saw when I was a child.
I could almost swear to him. The man was wild
And wandered. His home was where he was free.
Everybody has met one such man as he.
Does he keep clear old paths that no one uses
But once a lifetime when he loves or muses?
He is English as this gate, these flowers, this mire.
And when at eight years old Lob-lie-by-the-fire
Came in my books, this was the man I saw.
He has been in England as long as dove and daw,
Calling the wild cherry tree the merry tree,
The rose campion Bridget-in-her-bravery;
And in a tender mood he, as I guess,
Christened one flower Love-in-idleness,
And while he walked from Exeter to Leeds
One April called all cuckoo-flowers Milkmaids.
From him old herbal Gerard learnt, as a boy,
Our blackbirds sang no English till his ear
(She was Jan Toy the Lucky, who, having lost
A shilling, and found a penny loaf, rejoiced.)
For reasons of his own to him the wren
Is Jenny Pooter. Before all other men
Their name was his care. He too could explain
He knows, if anyone. Why Tumbling Bay,
Inland in Kent, is called so, he might say.
If ever a sage troubles him he will buzz
Like a beehive to conclude the tedious fray:
And the sage, who knows all languages, runs away.
Yet Lob has thirteen hundred names for a fool,
And though he never could spare time for school
To unteach what the fox so well expressed,
He can talk quite as well as anyone
After his thinking is forgot and done.
Worth sixpence skinning it. She heard him speak:
Said he, telling the tale in after years.
With blue smock and with gold rings in his ears,
Sometimes he is a pedlar, not too poor
To keep his wit. This is tall Tom that bore
The logs in, and with Shakespeare in the hall
Once talked, when icicles hung by the wall.
As Herne the Hunter he has known hard times.
On sleepless nights he made up weather rhymes
Which others spoilt. And, Hob being then his name,
He kept the hog that thought the butcher came
When there were kings in Kent this very Lob,
Whose sheep grew fat and he himself grew merry,
For he alone, unlike squire, lord, and king,
Watched a night by her without slumbering;
He kept both waking. When he was but a lad
By rousing her to laugh at him. He carried
His donkey on his back. So they were married.
He tricked the giant coming to destroy
Of shoes for mending. The giant let fall from his spade
The earth for damming Severn, and thus made
The Wrekin hill; and little Ercall hill
Rose where the giant scraped his boots. While still
But long before he could have been wise, ages
Earlier than this, while he grew thick and strong
And ate his bacon, or, at times, sang a song
And merely smelt it, as Jack the giant-killer
He made a name. He too ground up the miller,
Or that his name is Walker, or Bottlesford,
Or Button, a mere clown, or squire, or lord?
Jack Smith, Jack Moon, poor Jack of every trade,
Jack-in-the-hedge, or Robin-run-by-the-wall,
Robin Hood, Ragged Robin, lazy Bob,
Although he was seen dying at Waterloo,
Lives yet. He never will admit he is dead
And I remove my house out of the lane
But one glimpse of his back, as there he stood,
Young Jack perhaps, and now a Wiltshireman
As he has oft been since his days began.

Where the quiet-coloured end of evening smiles,
      Miles and miles
On the solitary pastures where our sheep
      Half-asleep
Tinkle homeward thro' the twilight, stray or stop
Was the site once of a city great and gay,
      (So they say)
Of our country's very capital, its prince
      Ages since
Held his court in, gathered councils, wielding far
      Peace or war.
Now the country does not even boast a tree,
      As you see,
To distinguish slopes of verdure, certain rills
      From the hills
Intersect and give a name to, (else they run
      Into one)
Where the domed and daring palace shot its spires
      Up like fires
O'er the hundred-gated circuit of a wall
      Bounding all
Made of marble, men might march on nor be prest
      Twelve abreast.
And such plenty and perfection, see, of grass
      Never was!
Such a carpet as, this summer-time, o'er-spreads
      And embeds
Every vestige of the city, guessed alone,
Where a multitude of men breathed joy and woe
      Long ago;
Lust of glory pricked their hearts up, dread of shame
      Struck them tame;
And that glory and that shame alike, the gold
      Bought and sold.
      On the plains,
By the caper overrooted, by the gourd
      Overscored,
While the patching houseleek's head of blossom winks
Marks the basement whence a tower in ancient time
      Sprang sublime,
And a burning ring, all round, the chariots traced
      As they raced,
And the monarch and his minions and his dames
      Viewed the games.
And I know, while thus the quiet-coloured eve
      Smiles to leave
To their folding, all our many-tinkling fleece
      In such peace,
And the slopes and rills in undistinguished grey
That a girl with eager eyes and yellow hair
      Waits me there
In the turret whence the charioteers caught soul
      For the goal,
When the king looked, where she looks now, breathless, dumb
        Till I come.
But he looked upon the city, every side,
      Far and wide,
All the mountains topped with temples, all the glades'
      Colonnades,
      All the men!
When I do come, she will speak not, she will stand,
      Either hand
On my shoulder, give her eyes the first embrace
      Of my face,
Ere we rush, ere we extinguish sight and speech
      Each on each.
In one year they sent a million fighters forth
      South and North,
And they built their gods a brazen pillar high
      As the sky
      Gold, of course.
O heart! oh blood that freezes, blood that burns!
      Earth's returns
For whole centuries of folly, noise and sin!
      Shut them in,
With their triumphs and their glories and the rest!
      Love is best.

I could make a wardrobe 
with tufts of wool 
caught on thistle and bracken.
I might have woven whole cloth.
Come watch, the man says, 
shearing sheep 
with the precision of long practice, 
fleece, removed all of a piece, 
rolled in a neat bundle.

Straddling a ewe, 
the man props its head on his foot, 
leans down with clippers, 
each pass across the coat a caress.
His dogs, lying nearby, 
loving the hands that have learned 
to gentle the life beneath them.
Sleep little baby, clean as a nut,
Your fingers uncurl and your eyes are shut.
Your life was ours, which is with you.
Go on your journey. We go too.
The bat is flying round the house
Like an umbrella turned into a mouse.
The moon is astonished and so are the sheep:
Their bells have come to send you to sleep.
Oh be our rest, our hopeful start.
Turn your head to my beating heart.
Sleep little baby, clean as a nut,
Your fingers uncurl and your eyes are shut.
Here, in the darkness, where this plaster saint
And one small candle shines, but not so faint
Is that why I see Monty now? equal to any saint, poor boy, as good as gold,
But still, with just the proper trace
Of earthliness on his shining wedding face;
And then gone suddenly blank and old
The hateful day of the divorce:
Stuart got his, hands down, of course
He was the first, he stands out clearer than the rest.
But, up there, from your still, star-lighted tree
Watching black shadows on green lawns and red carnations burning in the sun,
If it is Your will that we should be content with the tame, bloodless things.
And throwing out the youngest smile, shy, but half haughty and half sweet.
All that was left of oh! the loveliest face, by time and grief!
That is not always true: there was my Mother (well at least the dead are free!) 
If there were fifty heavens God could not give us back the child who went or never came;
Yes, it may be, when He has shorn, led us to slaughter, torn the bleating soul in us to rags,
And they are not gone, yet, for me, the lights, the colours, the perfumes,
To know how jewels taste, just as I used to think
There was the scent in every red and yellow rose
With, upstairs, in the blue and gold box of a room, just the maids' footsteps overhead,
She had sat staring, with dry eyes, at this and that man going past
And while her perfume clung to You from head to feet all through the day
One breath, one throbbing quietness, as if the thing behind our lips was endless life,
It is the only truth: it is the dream in us that neither life nor death nor any other
And He has never shared with me my haunted house beneath the trees
Of Eden and Calvary, with its ghosts that have not any eyes for tears,
And the happier guests who would not see, or if they did, remember these,
She wakes to the odor of sheep,
trying to rub it off her hands.
Dressed up in her native colors,
standing by a tourist van, she is
a dandelion, golden like the alpaca
woven buttons of her sweater.
She is done with the tourists
taking her photo, holding a baby lamb.
Without official papers in a new country,
she briskly walks, and obscenely slow,
a foreign tongue slithers by; its scales are
the words she has not yet learned to trust.
The baby girl hiding in her belly's nest
The sick horses are pushed off
the deck of a ship bound for Cuba.
Pursuing, their heads bobbing,
clearing the salt from their nostrils,
they kick. As long as they can,
they swim in the rushing swells, falling
behind the ship's scent, swine and men.
Know someone who needs their spirits lifted?
Why not try a lavender or a rose scent?
At the end of a hallway, a machine rattles
and spits out ice cubes, some dropping,
transparent on the dull vines of the carpet.
Manuela pushes a cart of towels, shampoo,
lotion, and soap bars scented with rose oil.
Glancing down at the "Do Not Disturb" signs,
she walks past the banker taking his third shower
and the mother nursing her twins on a blanket
spread across the floor. The peepholes are
silent as a pile of dirty pillows, some dark
never blinking, others bullet holes of light.
Before leaving the Day's Inn on Mt. Vernon,
she steals a few soap bars for her daughter,
who places them in her dresser drawers,
scenting her lingerie, fresh as cut flowers.
A dandelion's root, far deeper,
tolerant of drought and poor soil,
is not an easily uprooted presence.
Manuela hears the creaking of planks,
the flapping of sails, and horses stomping,
nervous, eyeing the full moon. She sees
the marks of hooves in the sand, marks
coming out from the sea and vanishing inland.
She wakes to that odor again.
This time she stands beside her Incan city,
its green peaks cutting the sky open,
painted on La Carreta Restaurant's wall.
Her daughter is taking her photo,
The blindfolded horses are hoisted on board
in belly slings, and their feet are tied,
slightly touching the deck, suspended
for most of the voyage, but once on land
some will escape and revert to the wild.
Know someone who needs their spirits lifted?
Why not try a lavender or a rose scent?
She lets the desert in, wild sage.
The desert takes her back home
while a farmer's pig crosses the highway.
She sees her fake ID fly off the dashboard.
The wheels of her upside-down car spin:
Suspended, buckled to her seat, feet dangling,
she spots the moon on the shards
of her windshield, frozen tears,
the peepholes blinking back at her.
Death touches down like a hoof.
A gust of wind pushes the seeds
of dandelions upward, a flock of white,
a gauze gown drifting over yuccas.
Memory is the scent of soap bars
taking refuge in a daughter's drawer.
[facsimile]
make it ride. All poetry is conceptual

 You have to get over

in-

Every poem must have 13 distinct frames, devices, motifs, styles, forms, or

t.
I want to be understood,

stuck.

 all alone and feeling
As dry as a bubble, as expectant as the dead

 vive.
gnostic enough,

more. There is more
I left my purpose in my other pants.

Save these words for a while because
of something they remind you of
although you cannot remember
what that is a sense that is part
dust and part the light of morning
you were about to say a name
and it is not there I forget
them too I am learning to pray
to Perdita to whom I said
nothing at the time and now she
cannot hear me as far as I
know but the day goes on looking
the names often change more slowly
than the meanings whole families
grow up in them and then are gone
into the anonymous sky
oh Perdita does the hope go on
after the names are forgotten
and is the pain of the past done
when the calling has stopped and those
betrayals so long repeated
that they are taken for granted
as the shepherd does with the sheep
The fence was down. Out among humid smells
and shrill cicadas we walked, the lichened trunks
moon-blue, our faces blue and our hands.
Led by their bellwether bellies, the sheep
had toddled astray. The neighbor farmer's woods
or coyotes might have got them, or the far road.
I remember the night, the moon-colored grass
we waded through to look for them, the oaks
tangled and dark, like starting a story midway.
We gazed over seed heads to the barn
toppled in the homestead orchard. Then we saw
the weather of white wool, a cloud in the blue
moving without sound as if charmed
by the moon beholding them out of bounds.
Time has not tightened the wire or righted the barn.
The unpruned orchard rots in its meadow
and the story unravels, the sunlight creeping back
like a song with nobody left to hear it.
I
Me dithering in the drift of cordial seas;
Ten years are time enough to be dismayed
Languidly winds into the inner ear.

II
Get up and once again politely lying
Invite the ladies toward the mistletoe
Above the golden oaken mantel, years ago!

Then hang this picture for a calendar,
The Huns gelded and feeding in a ring.

III
Give me this day a faith not personal
Nor even left uneasy by his fall.

Is of an enemy in remote oceans
Unstalked by Christ: these are the better notions.

IV
Gives back the cheated and light dividend
Flesh for reality inside a stone
Dead or still living, will not break or bend.

While the sun squats upon the waveless seas.
So all day long the noise of battle roll'd 
Among the mountains by the winter sea; 
Until King Arthur's table, man by man, 
Had fallen in Lyonnesse about their Lord, 
King Arthur: then, because his wound was deep, 
The bold Sir Bedivere uplifted him, 
Sir Bedivere, the last of all his knights, 
And bore him to a chapel nigh the field, 
A broken chancel with a broken cross, 
That stood on a dark strait of barren land. 
On one side lay the ocean, and on one 
Lay a great water, and the moon was full. 
"The sequel of to-day unsolders all 
The goodliest fellowship of famous knights 
Whereof this world holds record. Such a sleep 
Shall never more, at any future time, 
Delight our souls with talk of knightly deeds, 
Walking about the gardens and the halls 
Of Camelot, as in the days that were. 
Tho' Merlin sware that I should come again 
I am so deeply smitten thro' the helm 
That without help I cannot last till morn. 
Thou therefore take my brand Excalibur, 
Which was my pride: for thou rememberest how 
In those old days, one summer noon, an arm 
Rose up from out the bosom of the lake, 
Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful, 
And took it, and have worn it, like a king: 
And, wheresoever I am sung or told 
In aftertime, this also shall be known: 
But now delay not: take Excalibur, 
And fling him far into the middle mere: 
"It is not meet, Sir King, to leave thee thus, 
Aidless, alone, and smitten thro' the helm. 
A little thing may harm a wounded man. 
Yet I thy hest will all perform at full, 
Watch what I see, and lightly bring thee word." 
And in the moon athwart the place of tombs, 
Where lay the mighty bones of ancient men, 
Old knights, and over them the sea-wind sang 
Shrill, chill, with flakes of foam. He, stepping down 
By zigzag paths, and juts of pointed rock, 
Came on the shining levels of the lake. 
And o'er him, drawing it, the winter moon, 
Brightening the skirts of a long cloud, ran forth 
And sparkled keen with frost against the hilt: 
For all the haft twinkled with diamond sparks, 
Myriads of topaz-lights, and jacinth work 
Of subtlest jewellery. He gazed so long 
That both his eyes were dazzled, as he stood, 
This way and that dividing the swift mind, 
In act to throw: but at the last it seem'd 
Better to leave Excalibur conceal'd 
There in the many-knotted water-flags, 
That whistled stiff and dry about the marge. 
So strode he back slow to the wounded King. 
"Hast thou perform'd my mission which I gave? 
What is it thou hast seen, or what hast heard?" 
"I heard the ripple washing in the reeds, 
And the wild water lapping on the crag." 
"Thou hast betray'd thy nature and thy name, 
Not rendering true answer, as beseem'd 
Thy fealty, nor like a noble knight: 
For surer sign had follow'd, either hand, 
Or voice, or else a motion of the mere. 
This is a shameful thing for men to lie. 
Yet now, I charge thee, quickly go again 
As thou art lief and dear, and do the thing 
I bade thee, watch, and lightly bring me word." 
Across the ridge, and paced beside the mere, 
Counting the dewy pebbles, fixed in thought; 
But when he saw the wonder of the hilt, 
How curiously and strangely chased, he smote 
His palms together, and he cried aloud, 
Surely a precious thing, one worthy note, 
Should thus be lost forever from the earth, 
Which might have pleased the eyes of many men. 
What good should follow this, if this were done? 
What harm, undone? deep harm to disobey, 
Seeing obedience is the bond of rule. 
Were it well to obey then, if a king demand 
An act unprofitable, against himself? 
The King is sick, and knows not what he does. 
What record, or what relic of my lord 
Should be to aftertime, but empty breath 
And rumours of a doubt? but were this kept, 
Stored in some treasure-house of mighty kings, 
Some one might show it at a joust of arms, 
Saying, 'King Arthur's sword, Excalibur, 
Wrought by the lonely maiden of the Lake; 
Nine years she wrought it, sitting in the deeps 
Upon the hidden bases of the hills.' 
So might some old man speak in the aftertime 
To all the people, winning reverence. 
But now much honour and much fame were lost." 
And hid Excalibur the second time, 
And so strode back slow to the wounded King. 
"What is it thou hast seen, or what hast heard?" 
"I heard the water lapping on the crag, 
And the long ripple washing in the reeds." 
"Ah, miserable and unkind, untrue, 
Unknightly, traitor-hearted! Woe is me! 
Authority forgets a dying king, 
Laid widow'd of the power in his eye 
That bow'd the will. I see thee what thou art, 
For thou, the latest-left of all my knights, 
In whom should meet the offices of all, 
Thou wouldst betray me for the precious hilt; 
Either from lust of gold, or like a girl 
Valuing the giddy pleasure of the eyes. 
Yet, for a man may fail in duty twice, 
And the third time may prosper, get thee hence: 
But, if thou spare to fling Excalibur, 
I will arise and slay thee with my hands." 
And, leaping down the ridges lightly, plunged 
Among the bulrush-beds, and clutch'd the sword, 
And strongly wheel'd and threw it. The great brand 
Made lightnings in the splendour of the moon, 
And flashing round and round, and whirl'd in an arch, 
Shot like a streamer of the northern morn, 
Seen where the moving isles of winter shock 
By night, with noises of the northern sea. 
So flash'd and fell the brand Excalibur: 
But ere he dipt the surface, rose an arm 
Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful, 
And caught him by the hilt, and brandish'd him 
Three times, and drew him under in the mere. 
And lightly went the other to the King. 
"Now see I by thine eyes that this is done. 
Speak out: what is it thou hast heard, or seen?" 
"Sir King, I closed mine eyelids, lest the gems 
Should blind my purpose, for I never saw, 
Nor shall see, here or elsewhere, till I die, 
Not tho' I live three lives of mortal men, 
So great a miracle as yonder hilt. 
Then with both hands I flung him, wheeling him; 
But when I look'd again, behold an arm, 
Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful, 
That caught him by the hilt, and brandish'd him 
Three times, and drew him under in the mere." 
"My end draws nigh; 't is time that I were gone. 
Make broad thy shoulders to receive my weight, 
And bear me to the margin; yet I fear 
My wound hath taken cold, and I shall die." 
Slowly, with pain, reclining on his arm, 
And looking wistfully with wide blue eyes 
As in a picture. Him Sir Bedivere 
Remorsefully regarded thro' his tears, 
And would have spoken, but he found not words, 
Then took with care, and kneeling on one knee, 
O'er both his shoulders drew the languid hands, 
And rising bore him thro' the place of tombs. 
Like one that feels a nightmare on his bed 
When all the house is mute. So sigh'd the King 
Muttering and murmuring at his ear, "Quick, quick! 
I fear it is too late, and I shall die." 
But the other swiftly strode from ridge to ridge, 
Clothed with his breath, and looking, as he walk'd 
Larger than human on the frozen hills. 
He heard the deep behind him, and a cry 
Before. His own thought drove him like a goad. 
Dry clash'd his harness in the icy caves 
And barren chasms, and all to left and right 
The bare black cliff clang'd round him, as he based 
His feet on juts of slippery crag that rang 
And on a sudden, lo! the level lake, 
And the long glories of the winter moon. 
Dark as a funeral scarf from stem to stern, 
Beneath them; and descending they were ware 
That all the decks were dense with stately forms 
A cry that shiver'd to the tingling stars, 
And, as it were one voice, an agony 
Of lamentation, like a wind, that shrills 
All night in a waste land, where no one comes, 
Or hath come, since the making of the world. 
And to the barge they came. There those three Queens 
Put forth their hands, and took the King, and wept. 
But she that rose the tallest of them all 
And fairest, laid his head upon her lap, 
And loosed the shatter'd casque, and chafed his hands, 
And call'd him by his name, complaining loud 
And dropping bitter tears against his brow 
Striped with dark blood: for all his face was white 
And colourless, and like the wither'd moon 
Smote by the fresh beam of the springing east; 
And all his greaves and cuisses dash'd with drops 
That made his forehead like a rising sun 
Or, clotted into points and hanging loose, 
Mix'd with the knightly growth that fringed his lips. 
So like a shatter'd column lay the King; 
Not like that Arthur who, with lance in rest, 
From spur to plume a star of tournament, 
Shot thro' the lists at Camelot, and charged 
Before the eyes of ladies and of kings. 
"Ah! my Lord Arthur, whither shall I go? 
Where shall I hide my forehead and my eyes? 
For now I see the true old times are dead, 
When every morning brought a noble chance, 
And every chance brought out a noble knight. 
Such times have been not since the light that led 
The holy Elders with the gift of myrrh. 
But now the whole ROUND TABLE is dissolved 
Which was an image of the mighty world; 
And I, the last, go forth companionless, 
And the days darken round me, and the years, 
Among new men, strange faces, other minds." 
"The old order changeth, yielding place to new, 
And God fulfils Himself in many ways, 
Lest one good custom should corrupt the world. 
Comfort thyself: what comfort is in me? 
I have lived my life, and that which I have done 
May He within Himself make pure! but thou, 
If thou shouldst never see my face again, 
Pray for my soul. More things are wrought by prayer 
Than this world dreams of. Wherefore, let thy voice 
Rise like a fountain for me night and day. 
For what are men better than sheep or goats 
That nourish a blind life within the brain, 
If, knowing God, they lift not hands of prayer 
Both for themselves and those who call them friend? 
For so the whole round earth is every way 
Bound by gold chains about the feet of God. 
But now farewell. I am going a long way 
(For all my mind is clouded with a doubt) 
To the island-valley of Avilion; 
Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow, 
Nor ever wind blows loudly; but it lies 
Deep-meadow'd, happy, fair with orchard-lawns 
And bowery hollows crown'd with summer sea, 
Where I will heal me of my grievous wound." 
Moved from the brink, like some full-breasted swan 
That, fluting a wild carol ere her death, 
Ruffles her pure cold plume, and takes the flood 
With swarthy webs. Long stood Sir Bedivere 
Revolving many memories, till the hull 
Look'd one black dot against the verge of dawn, 
And on the mere the wailing died away. 

1
three years we waited for him, attention riveted,
closely scanning
the pines the shore the stars.
we were searching to find once more the first seed
so that the age-old drama could begin again.
We returned to our homes broken,
limbs incapable, mouths cracked
by the tastes of rust and brine.
when we woke we traveled towards the north, strangers
plunged into mist by the immaculate wings of swans that wounded us.
On winter nights the strong wind from the east maddened us,
We brought back
these carved reliefs of a humble art.
Still one more well inside a cave.
It used to be easy for us to draw up idols and ornaments
to please those friends who still remained loyal to us.
remind us of our past happiness:
the fingers on the rim, as the poet put it.
The fingers feel the coolness of the stone a little,
and the cave stakes its soul and loses it
every moment, full of silence, without a drop of water.
I woke with this marble head in my hands;
It was falling into the dream as I was coming out of the dream
so our life became one and it will be very difficult for it to separate again.
I look at the eyes: neither open nor closed
I speak to the mouth which keeps trying to speak
I hold the cheeks which have broken through the skin.
My hands disappear and come towards me
mutilated.
And a soul
if it is to know itself
must look
into its own soul:
about the work or the thirst or the frost,
they had the bearing of trees and waves
that accept the wind and the rain
accept the night and the sun
without changing in the midst of change.
They were fine, whole days
they sweated at the oars with lowered eyes
breathing in rhythm
and their blood reddened a submissive skin.
Sometimes they sang, with lowered eyes
as we were passing the deserted island with the Barbary figs
to the west, beyond the cape of the dogs
that bark.
If it is to know itself, they said
it must look into its own soul, they said
in the sunset.
We went past many capes many islands the sea
leading to another sea, gulls and seals.
Sometimes disconsolate women wept
lamenting their lost children
and others frantic sought Alexander the Great
and glories buried in the depths of Asia.
We moored on shores full of night-scenes,
the birds singing, with waters that left on the hands
the memory of a great happiness.
But the voyages did not end.
Their souls became one with the oars and the oarlocks
with the solemn face of the prow
with the water that shattered their image.
The companions died one by one,
with lowered eyes. Their oars
mark the place where they sleep on the shore.
No one remembers them. Justice
We saw them perhaps twice and then they took to the ships:
cargoes of coal, cargoes of grain, and our friends
lost beyond the ocean forever.
Dawn finds us beside the tired lamp
drawing on paper, awkwardly, painfully,
ships mermaids or sea shells;
at dusk we go down to the river
because it shows us the way to the sea;
and we spend the nights in cellars that smell of tar.
Our friends have left us
we met them when sleep
still brought us close to the breathing wave
perhaps we search for them because we search for the other life,
beyond the statues.
The garden with its fountains in the rain
you will see only from behind the clouded glass
of the low window. Your room
will be lit only by the flames from the fireplace
and sometimes the distant lightning will reveal
the wrinkles on your forehead, my old Friend.
The garden with the fountains that in your hands
was a rhythm of the other life, beyond the broken
statues and the tragic columns
and a dance among the oleanders
misty glass will have cut it off from your life.
will spring from your memory to strike
this window struck by rain
from the outside world.
Westward the sea merges with a mountain range.
From our left the south wind blows and drives us mad,
the kind of wind that strips bones of their flesh.
Our house among pines and carobs.
Large windows. Large tables
so many months now, dropping them
into the space between us in order to fill it up.
Star of dawn, when you lowered your eyes
our hours were sweeter than oil
on a wound, more joyful than cold water
You held our life in the palm of your hand.
After the bitter bread of exile,
at night if we remain in front of the white wall
your voice approaches us like the hope of fire;
and again this wind hones
a razor against our nerves.
Each of us writes you the same thing
watching, each of us, the same world separately
the light and darkness on the mountain range
and you.
Who will lift this sorrow from our hearts?
Yesterday evening a heavy rain and again today
would build a collapsing tower.
Among these decimated villages
on this promontory, open to the south wind
with the mountain range in front of us hiding you,
who will appraise for us the sentence to oblivion?
Who will accept our offering, at this close of autumn?

1.
Cross-hatchings, palm and rain,
clapboard faded
to the grain, half-shutters
open to old vines and mangroves
draining their own shadows;
recollecting what the body knows
suspended between coral
and shifting images of cloud ...

After death,
after the knowledge
of death,
his death,

his face, unwrapped,
already yellowed,
papery, recovered
with a small white cloth

then lowered away
and shut to the earth;
So pierced,
so mute,
these words
re-opening:
 Not this.

2.
The rain had gone. I swam against the current,
harnessed by water till I turned and swung
out with the tide, shouldering deep
into a rhythm of my own, long strokes
pulled under the body and returning
past the glinting crease in which I breathed,
the sea half-woken like another body
bedded into sheer transparency,
the outer reaches granular with light.
Comebacks. Chains of radiance.
Far more than meet the eye.
What do they meet then, intimate
but otherworldly, mimicking the world?

pines along the shoreline near a fort
where cannons rust, mouths left open among
thistleweed around the dozing moat.
Far back among fallen needles, pigeons shuffle
through shade, their feathers iris underlight,
soft flares bob the dark.
The land had disappeared.
The sun had followed it. From either wrist,
half-mingled with my breath into the night,
a trail of ungloved phosphor travelled back.

3.
Sounds too have their surfaces:
within
the mortal frame, particles of blood
revolve as in a sort of heaven where
breath moves through us as an unseen light;
but when the marrow bonds are parted they in turn
set loose what has been called the soul ...
the spill and friction
glancing like a coin within a sea of coins;
my left hand pulls through as I breathe,
the right recovers, elbow in the air,
pike-flash in a swerving current,
predatory bird.

that constellation

as each had been, now
gone. Or going on,

4.
A slanting chop.
Erratic gasps
between thick chunks of water
crowded through the night.
The unclogged screw
of a propellor
ringing into fossil-drillings,

(the jangled
monkey-chain above his bed;
he clung with both hands
to the small trapese,
his lower body paralyzed
for months ...

far larger than myself,
a shambling hulk,
tentacular, a pulpy
helmet, lantern eyes,
the huge mouth gorging,
undigested corpses
bulging in the belly wall.
I thrashed to break free
but the ocean held me,
and a slap of water broke
across my mouth.

5.Natal Command
Troughs of recollection; hands now two numb sponges,
and a cold ache pressed into the spine.
A conscript leaning on my rifle, I stood guard for hours
staring through wire toward the Blue Waters Hotel:
an all-night crew, unreal, flourescent
polished the lobby floors; high in a yellow cell
black shadows rippled on drapes until the lights went out.
beyond the esplanade; the ocean shifting
to an onshore drowse of salt over the palm trees and camp.
A palm rat slithers through rotten fronds.
The mind floats imageless.
Then back to footage of commandos stalking a sentry
over the mouth, the blade thrust in, the sagging weight set down,
a clutch to save the helmet as it drops to gravel, quick
hand signals to shadows hunched behind. One night while
still on guard I crept into an empty tent and fell asleep.
He held my rifle. Prodded the bayonet at my spine,
as the bayonet found the nerve, pain jolting
to my hands and feet.His boot beside the blade
he pumped me hard against the ground then let me up,
my limbs still trembling, the uniform stuck bloody to my back.

6.
When does it begin,
the reptile mind among its enemies
driven deep into the bag,
the rifle stock slammed home,
The guilt of cut wood? Its smell, its bloody show?
of raspberry. Fence-posts sturdy and hardy
and doused in creosote: to stand alone
in Termitesville. The sweetness turns rust.
say for a year on the pile. Hot as hell to fire.
of its dozen years a demonstration in history
as accumulation. Collective survey of occupation:
the real corps de ballet, the shrubby scenery,
All those brandings. Emblem of our town
that would miss no more than our rates.
jam on white damper, think coals of fires.
The meager shade for sheep and cattle
Nuisances. Saw deep into rough bark,
showered in pollen. Unholy fires
at the end of winter; and all that premonition,
all those seeds with snow in their bellies,
So overwhelmingly familiar to me.
No Old Country raspberry homesickness.
Just an inkling of anthocyanin pigments.
English, I think. Because almost nobody has a real one.
The standards are made in Japanese or German factories.
Standards are from China; they are recycled sheepskin wallets.
I was shocked too when I heard this.
I do not have an actual either but they called
me a genius when I figured it out about the fetal
lamb/sheep skin. What else to do with all the wallets
I do not know what the inside of this thing looks like
but I think it looks like a brain made of mozzarella cheese.

if you are pregnant, you will be blamed
as we all in the new world know better each day.
They say unicorn, I say wasabi.
Apparently, almost everyone gets green horseradish with sushi.
Wasabi takes several million years to grow,
its taste is delicate. When I mentioned Japan
earlier, I meant the motor city.
of slow unit dance or Remarkable Mask.
T-cell robots, we of lambs and plants and jellyfish that are
in our eyes which are colored by their place in the ocean.
resins from pine, precious stones,
silver dust, and sea grass filaments,
stalks, pig livers, skin, a milk protein.
of the unreal, and I would love to be one with a genuine
but I have not the stomach to pull off the cunning necessary
You barter for it; you lie.
to have options. But to get them dishonestly?
I have got to say goodbye to the babyhood phase.
Learn to thrive! Nobody has a father or a mother.
I know this means to thrive!
My sheepskin wallet is . . .
What could a person say? Stuck in the past,
tripped up by the concept of wallet?
because I feel okay and you look alright.
has not been recorded in over 180 years
which means billions of here/now moments.
Which means forgotten a trillion times
and remembered exactly one plus that.
in the old blueprints that made donuts
get out of bed and there was a diamond near my head.
I was reading about moray eels,
their hydraulics. How they practically
fly-fish with agility.

Wilderness saved from childhood.
Of this secret, one must be silent
so the sun can trust us.
Kids need each other.
Better they never get
separated entirely.
Contra this, I do want to fly fish.
To cast off and plant it then go with
the nylon line. Where to take off
the old wallet and give it back
making arrangements to go to the show
where we trade our new pieces congenially
and find others, depleted by scavengers,
and get them up-and-running to better suns,
not the promised land, exactly
the opposite. Exactly the opposite
of anything promised.

He sits between the doctor and the law.
Neither can help. Barbiturate in paw
one, whiskey in paw two, a dying man:
the poet down, and his fell caravan.
They laugh and they mistake the lash that lurks
in his tongue for the honey of his works.
The poet is at bay, the hounds baying,
dig his grave with careful kindness, saying:
'Another whiskey, and make it a large one!'
Priests within, acolytes at the margin
they love the dead, the living man they hate.
and making furtive sketches of his face,
and he could hear, above their straining laughs,
the rustling foolscap of their epitaphs.
Eras do not end when great poets die,
for poetry is not whole, it is where man
chose mountains to conform, to carve his own
face among the Gothic richness and the sky,
and the gargoyles, and the lesser tradesmen.
Praise from the apprentice is always shown
in miniatures of a similar stone.
I saw the master in his human guise
open doors to let me in, and rhythm out.
He smiled and entertained into the night.
I was aware of work undone. His eyes,
like owls', warned images from the room.
Under the stairs the muse was crying; shields
clashed in the kitchen and the war drum's boom,
men in celtic war dress entered from the right.
I left, my conversation put to rout.

I have seen him dine
in middle-class surroundings,
his manners refined,
as his family around him
talk about nothing,
one of their favourite theses.
I have seen him lying
between the street and pavement,
atoning, dying
for their sins, the fittest payment
he can make for them,
to get drunk and go to pieces.
On his father's face
in sparse lines etched out by ice,
the puritan race
has come to its zenith of grey spite,
its climax of hate,
its essence of frigidity.
Let the bourgeoisie beware,
who could not control his head
and kept it in their care
until the brain bled:
this head is a poet's head,
this head holds a galaxy.
It has to be a hill,
high, of course, and twilit.
There have to be some birds,
all sadly audible:
a necessary haze,
and small wristlets of rain,
yes, and a tremendous
air of satisfaction.
Both of us will be old
and both our wives, of course,
have died, young, and tragic.
And all our children have
gone their far ways, estranged,
or else not begotten.
We have been through a war,
been hungry, and heroes:
and here we are now, calm,
fed, and reminiscent.
The hills are old, silent:
our pipe-smoke rises up.
We have come a long way . . . .
To be alone, and not to be lonely,
to have time to myself, and not be bored;
to live in some suburban house, beside
the mountains, with an adequate supply
of stout and spirits (or of stout only),
and some cigarettes, and writing paper,
and a little cheap food, and a small hoard
of necessary books, where I could write
in dark as monks did, with only blue sky
as interference, wind as soul-reaper.
But what would I do if on certain nights
I was mad in heat for the public lights?
I would chain myself to a living tree
to foil the Sirens of the distant city.

(I speak of one from many singled out)
One of those heavenly days that cannot die;
When, in the eagerness of boyish hope,
I left our cottage-threshold, sallying forth
With a huge wallet o'er my shoulders slung,
A nutting-crook in hand; and turned my steps
Tow'rd some far-distant wood, a Figure quaint,
Tricked out in proud disguise of cast-off weeds
Which for that service had been husbanded,
Motley accoutrement, of power to smile
More ragged than need was! O'er pathless rocks,
Through beds of matted fern, and tangled thickets,
Forcing my way, I came to one dear nook
Unvisited, where not a broken bough
Drooped with its withered leaves, ungracious sign
Of devastation; but the hazels rose
Tall and erect, with tempting clusters hung,
Breathing with such suppression of the heart
As joy delights in; and, with wise restraint
Voluptuous, fearless of a rival, eyed
Among the flowers, and with the flowers I played;
A temper known to those, who, after long
And weary expectation, have been blest
With sudden happiness beyond all hope.
Perhaps it was a bower beneath whose leaves
The violets of five seasons re-appear
And fade, unseen by any human eye;
Where fairy water-breaks do murmur on
For ever; and I saw the sparkling foam,
That, fleeced with moss, under the shady trees,
I heard the murmur, and the murmuring sound,
In that sweet mood when pleasure loves to pay
Tribute to ease; and, of its joy secure,
The heart luxuriates with indifferent things,
Wasting its kindliness on stocks and stones,
And on the vacant air. Then up I rose,
And dragged to earth both branch and bough, with crash
And merciless ravage: and the shady nook
Of hazels, and the green and mossy bower,
Deformed and sullied, patiently gave up
Their quiet being: and, unless I now
Confound my present feelings with the past;
Ere from the mutilated bower I turned
Exulting, rich beyond the wealth of kings,
I felt a sense of pain when I beheld
Then, dearest Maiden, move along these shades
In gentleness of heart; with gentle hand
The sheep-killing dogs saunter home, 
wool scraps in their teeth. 
From the den of the moon 
ancestral wolves 
howl their approval. 
The farm boys, asleep in their beds, 
live the same wildness under their lids; 
every morning they come back 
through the whites of their eyes 
to do their chores, their hands pausing 
to pet the dog, to press 
its ears back, over the skull, 
to quiet that other world.
for wilderness. Ah, scutchweed, rushlightitude, if not,
why not, strowbegone, nor sheep, fa la, shall
to have noticed a similar weather pattern between
regret and the windy plains of remorse, like that must
make them the same, or should, or at least no more
different than a fetish for being eaten alive and
whole is, apparently, from the desire to leave loneliness
to be understood entirely stops being the main thing,
or a thing at all, even. They could let the nights unfurl
before them, one after the other, each a seemingly
it was there now, they hovered over it, what light there was
was their own.
and candlesticks and nibs, but the charcoal pencil and new sketchpad
are squat as aubergines in her hands in front of this display.
With bad weather forecast and light silting up in cramped windows,
we are the only visitors. The year settles in a corner of the room,
has removed its white gloves, tip by tip, and set to one side
its summer purse of bibelots and sheen. Half-term of her final year,
we are sightseers intent on moors. In the morning, her windcheater
and red wellies will bestow the dust of summer festivals upon
sullen, wind-soaked sheep. We will park, and walk ourselves 
into the final, cutting rain between pages of her favorite book.
She wants to go all the way to Top Withens, or the house they say
must have been Top Withens, given its loneliness and set. But now 
is artifacts and souvenirs: a perfume with too much musk in it,
between what should and should never be seen. We have fallen short.
She draws, and what she draws is rain falling slant inside the bedroom;
the bed as a box of leaves and stones and, within the display case, 
she hangs from the clothes rail, little moons. On the mannequin, 
water lilies stand in for morning dress, and the backdrop is marbled 
in what looks to me like veins and arteries. But when I flick through 
the sketchpad in the B&B, all the pages, what is left of them, are clean. 
Next day, she leaves it in the car. When she moves away, she will leave
it again, a sketchpad with no name on it and only the faintest traces 
of where she made skies of darned linen, and unfastened every stitch.
This is the month, and this the happy morn, 
Of wedded Maid, and Virgin Mother born, 
That glorious Form, that Light unsufferable, 
Wherewith he wont at Heav'n's high council-table, 
Say Heav'nly Muse, shall not thy sacred vein 
Hast thou no verse, no hymn, or solemn strain, 
See how from far upon the eastern road 
O run, prevent them with thy humble ode, 
It was the winter wild, 
While the Heav'n-born child, 
Nature in awe to him 
Had doff'd her gaudy trim, 
It was no season then for her 
To wanton with the Sun, her lusty paramour. 
Only with speeches fair 
She woos the gentle air 
And on her naked shame, 
Pollute with sinful blame, 
Confounded, that her Maker's eyes 
Should look so near upon her foul deformities. 
But he, her fears to cease, 
Sent down the meek-ey'd Peace: 
Down through the turning sphere, 
His ready harbinger, 
And waving wide her myrtle wand, 
She strikes a universal peace through sea and land. 
No war or battle's sound 
Was heard the world around; 
The hooked chariot stood 
Unstain'd with hostile blood; 
And kings sate still with awful eye, 
As if they surely knew their sovran Lord was by. 
But peaceful was the night 
Wherein the Prince of Light 
The winds with wonder whist, 
Smoothly the waters kist, 
Who now hath quite forgot to rave, 
While birds of calm sit brooding on the charmed wave. 
The Stars with deep amaze 
Stand fix'd in steadfast gaze, 
And will not take their flight, 
For all the morning light, 
But in their glimmering orbs did glow, 
Until their Lord himself bespake, and bid them go. 
And though the shady gloom 
Had given day her room, 
And hid his head for shame, 
As his inferior flame 
He saw a greater Sun appear 
Than his bright throne or burning axle-tree could bear. 
The shepherds on the lawn, 
Or ere the point of dawn, 
Full little thought they than 
That the mighty Pan 
Perhaps their loves, or else their sheep, 
Was all that did their silly thoughts so busy keep; 
When such music sweet 
Their hearts and ears did greet, 
Divinely warbled voice 
Answering the stringed noise, 
The air such pleasure loth to lose, 
With thousand echoes still prolongs each heav'nly close. 
Nature, that heard such sound 
Beneath the hollow round 
Now was almost won 
To think her part was done, 
She knew such harmony alone 
Could hold all heav'n and earth in happier union. 
At last surrounds their sight 
A globe of circular light, 
The helmed Cherubim 
And sworded Seraphim 
Harping in loud and solemn quire, 
With unexpressive notes to Heav'n's new-born Heir. 
Such music (as 'tis said) 
Before was never made, 
While the Creator great 
His constellations set, 
And cast the dark foundations deep, 
And bid the welt'ring waves their oozy channel keep. 
Ring out ye crystal spheres! 
Once bless our human ears 
And let your silver chime 
Move in melodious time, 
And with your ninefold harmony 
Make up full consort to th'angelic symphony. 
For if such holy song 
Enwrap our fancy long, 
And speckl'd Vanity 
Will sicken soon and die, 
And Hell itself will pass away, 
And leave her dolorous mansions to the peering Day. 
Yea, Truth and Justice then 
Will down return to men, 
Mercy will sit between, 
Thron'd in celestial sheen, 
And Heav'n, as at some festival, 
Will open wide the gates of her high palace hall. 
But wisest Fate says no: 
This must not yet be so; 
That on the bitter cross 
Must redeem our loss, 
Yet first to those ychain'd in sleep, 
The wakeful trump of doom must thunder through the deep, 
With such a horrid clang 
As on Mount Sinai rang 
The aged Earth, aghast 
With terror of that blast, 
When at the world's last session, 
The dreadful Judge in middle air shall spread his throne. 
And then at last our bliss 
Full and perfect is, 
Th'old Dragon under ground, 
In straiter limits bound, 
And, wrath to see his kingdom fail, 
Swinges the scaly horror of his folded tail. 
The Oracles are dumb; 
No voice or hideous hum 
Apollo from his shrine 
Can no more divine, 
No nightly trance or breathed spell 
Inspires the pale-ey'd priest from the prophetic cell. 
The lonely mountains o'er, 
And the resounding shore, 
From haunted spring, and dale 
Edg'd with poplar pale, 
With flow'r-inwoven tresses torn 
The Nymphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn. 
In consecrated earth, 
And on the holy hearth, 
In urns and altars round, 
A drear and dying sound 
And the chill marble seems to sweat, 
While each peculiar power forgoes his wonted seat. 
Peor and Ba{:a}lim 
Forsake their temples dim, 
And mooned Ashtaroth, 
Heav'n's queen and mother both, 
The Libyc Hammon shrinks his horn; 
In vain the Tyrian maids their wounded Thammuz mourn. 
And sullen Moloch, fled, 
Hath left in shadows dread 
In vain with cymbals' ring 
They call the grisly king, 
The brutish gods of Nile as fast, 
Isis and Orus, and the dog Anubis, haste. 
Nor is Osiris seen 
In Memphian grove or green, 
Nor can he be at rest 
Within his sacred chest, 
In vain with timbrel'd anthems dark 
The sable-stoled sorcerers bear his worshipp'd ark. 
He feels from Juda's land 
The dreaded Infant's hand, 
Nor all the gods beside 
Longer dare abide, 
Our Babe, to show his Godhead true, 
Can in his swaddling bands control the damned crew. 
So when the Sun in bed, 
Curtain'd with cloudy red, 
The flocking shadows pale 
Troop to th'infernal jail, 
And the yellow-skirted fays 
Fly after the night-steeds, leaving their moon-lov'd maze. 
But see, the Virgin blest 
Hath laid her Babe to rest: 
Heav'n's youngest-teemed star, 
Hath fix'd her polish'd car, 
And all about the courtly stable, 
Bright-harness'd Angels sit in order serviceable.
I. Until Jove let it be, no colonist 
Looked for his living in the common world. 
By reasoning and art. 
Then rivers felt his skiffs of the light alder; 
Pleiades, Hyades, and the Pole Star; 
By labor and by force of bitter need. 
Locates his house and granary underground, 
And frantic ant, scared of a poor old age. 
The threshing machine, the sledge, the weighted mattock, 
The withe baskets, the cheap furniture, 
If you still favor the divine countryside. 
III. Moreover, like men tempted by the straits 
We too must reckon on Arcturus star, 
The days of luminous Draco and the Kids. 
Let first the Pleiades and Hyades be hid 
The golden sun rules the great firmament 
Frozen with ice and rain, cerulean; 
Where pass in line the zodiacal stars. 
Styx and the lowest of the dead look on. 
Reddening evening lights her stars at last. 

In preparations for serener seasons. 
Umbrian trellises for the slow vine. 
Often the farmer loads his little mule 
With olive oil or apples, and brings home 
A grindstone or a block of pitch from market. 
On winter nights, whittling torches, while 
In that hale season, all their worries past, 
As after laden ships have reached home port, 
Then is the time to gather acorns and 
Laurel berries and the bloodred myrtle, 
When snow is deep, and ice is on the rivers. 

V. What of the humors and the ways of Autumn? 
Just when the farmer wished to reap his yellow 
Fields, and thresh his grain, 
I have often seen all the winds make war, 
Flattening the stout crops from the very roots; 
And in the black whirlwind 
Carrying off the ears and the light straw. 
And often mighty phalanxes of rain 
Marched out of heaven, as the clouds 
Rise and roar and seethe in their spuming beds. 
Enormous earth quivers, wild things flee, 
As Jove splits Athos with his firebolt 
The southwind wails in sheets of rain, 
And under that great wind the groves 
Lament, and the long breast of the shore is shaken. 
If you dislike to be so caught, mark well 
Especially, the gods. Offer to Ceres 
Annual sacrifice and annual worship 
In the first fair weather of the spring, 
And offer her libations of milk and wine; 
Conduct the sacrificial lamb three times 
Around the ripe field, in processional, 
And make his little dance, and sing to her. 

VI. When shall we herd the cattle to the stables? 
Beyond thin skimrack, shooting stars 
Furls his dripping sail. 
Flits round and round the lake, and frogs, 
As grub the sweet Swan River in Asia, 
May be observed dousing themselves and diving 
Sunny days may likewise be foretold: 
They coined the motto Each one Teach one. 

Am a creature of shame, I am ashamed to say. 

Incised his Pashto poems into styrofoam cups. 

There are many fake Sangomos. This one is real. 

The monoliths, sandstone
carvings crest high
in the air, tall like redwoods
with striking wind-eroded,
rain-washed, sunny edges.
Driving from the East,
two lovers from Chicago
discover a new city
made of sand cliffs,
rabbit brush, red soil,
heavy dark clouds,
sharp yucca. Sheep dot
the valley, nibbling on
wild green shoots.
50 miles from Kayenta.
A small Navajo town
holding onto the edges
of the Earth, encircled
by purple mountains,
dry mud washes, jackrabbit
burrows, shifting sand slopes,
coyote tracks, some
small thirsty juniper trees . . .
Four cows walk slowly
away from the sun to
the nearest gas station
looking for shade.
On the AAA map,
the road breaks
into two black veins:
interstate or road?
K-town to San Diego.
With no trendy clubs nearby,
these two hungry men see the neon
hamburger sign: Burger King.
Like walking into a Life magazine
pictorial of the Southwest, the men
walk through the pages of the fast-
food chain. There are four Navajo
families, their grandmothers
wearing glossy crushed velvet
dresses colored with deep splashes
of late-spring orchids, red or purple.
Decorated like royalty with turquoise
and silver bracelets, intricate inlaid
pins and concho belts. Around
their weathered necks are long
strands of white shell, coral or heavy
silver squash blossoms. Their black
hair tied back with white yarn
in a tight figure-eight bun.
On the bright orange walls
The Navajo Code Talkers,
watching grandfathers dressed
in pollen-yellow uniforms
and apple-red military caps,
with metal stars and stripes
pinned to them. Their eyes
are pieces of charcoal
already burnt-out from seeing war
and sleeping among the dead bodies.
Even the Blessing Way ceremonies
During WWII, they talked in code,
in a language reserved
for the wind. Or bears.
drowning Asian intonations
and clicking grasshoppers.
These grandfathers
saved the country so their
screaming grandchildren
around and around holding
half a hamburger and spilling
broken pieces of French fries across
ivory tiles. One little girl,
dark and pretty with high cheek-
bones and messy hair,
smiles at the attractive blond
man waiting to order.
Holding her hand up high
Lewis sees the plastic details:
a perfect smiles, candy-apple red lips,
large breasts, dark eyes, purple eye
shadow, a buckskin dress,
long frozen black hair,
with a rock turquoise necklace.
imagining this Navajo girl
wanting to be the icon.
In college, he remembers
studying late with a new leaf
moon for a history exam on
Indians and the Early Settlers
of the 1800s.
Pocahontas was an Indian guide
which tribe). He remembers
that women guides were
often called sleeping dictionaries,
exotic women translating words
and finding less treacherous routes
full of gold nuggets or beaver
pelts for fur trappers,
explorers, white men . . . . These men,
most of the time, slept
with their guides, maybe
remembers that his Clark
and starved at the table rubbing
his hard abs, still trying
to figure out which road to take:
K-town to San Diego,
interstate or road?
pulls her away from him,
thinking her daughter is bothering
him or maybe she knows about
Lewis and Clark.
She apologizes in broken English,
different from his Chicaga accent.
The sunset is different in this
land without the best architecture
buildings rising taller than the natural
red earth skyscrapers and clouds.
Different without the one lonely
Water Tower he feels kinship with
because it survived the Great Fire.
Lewis wonders all this, in the dying
light of day, as he orders
from another Pocahontas in a
maroon uniform, in Kayenta,
Arizona, on the Navajo Reservation
without the barbed wired fences,
sanctioned by a White government
the forced walk of thousands
of Navajos in the same coldsnap
of a Chicago winter, unforgiving.
Lewis sees the tiny exploitations again,
seemingly harmless toys given
to countless Navajo girls, and knows
without a map, they walk from
Ft. Defiance to Bosque Redondo
which is their same journey
through life, the corn pollen path
over the reservation and past
every modern man-made city.
After all this,
how old, how big
endless,
endless . . . .
Starlight, galaxies, silent
comets. Red maple leaves
spiraling up to the sky
like another great fire swallowing
Chicago under a blinding sandstorm.
In 1864, the Long Walk begins
in cold ice; in 1871 the Great Chicago
Fire ends in white flames . . . .
Clark still tracing his fingernail
along Route 66 to nowhere.
Children figure-eight skating
on ice, circling and circling Chicago.
The empty eyes of the Code Talkers
watching the Japanese war
prisoners, who were kept in war
camps on the reservation and
locked in photograph and on the opposite
side of the wall, black and white stills.
Four cows still resting under
But all joining in a single thought,
coming monsoon or on
the sunny beaches of San Diego.
Lewis clears his voice:
Whoppers with cheese and
1. 
Snow clouds shadow the bay, on the ice the odd fallen gull.  
I try to keep my friend from dying by remembering 
the grownups are inside saying prayers for the dead,  
more sacred than prayer. After dark his father 
to go to school with children who stayed behind 
and were murdered before promotion. 
Now his wife lies beside him. 
He may die with her head on his pillow. 
He sings in his sleep: 
Awake, he says, as if telling me a secret: 
His life is a light, fresh snow blowing across the bay. 

2. 
A year later in Jerusalem, he carries a fallen soldier  
on his back, himself. The text for the day begins:  
Seconds, minutes, hours are flesh, 
He sees I can not bear more of that. 
Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding  
of hands in sleep and we drink to life. 
Chilled in desert heat, what keeps him alive:  
perhaps the ashes of a girl he loved in childhood.  
Outside their window 
a Sun Bird and Dead Sea Sparrow fly 
from everlasting to everlasting. 
Later he covers my head with his hands, blessing me,  
later unable to walk alone he holds onto my hand  
with so much strength he comforts me. 
Left the proud tyrant and his land, 
The tribes with cheerful homage own 
Their king; and Judah was his throne. 
Across the deep their journey lay; 
The deep divides to make them way. 
Jordan beheld their march, and led, 
With backward current, to his head. 
The mountains shook like frighted sheep, 
Like lambs the little hillocks leap; 
Not Sinai on her base could stand, 
Make Jordan backward roll his tide? 
Why did ye leap, ye little hills? 
And whence the fright that Sinai feels? 
Tremble, thou earth, adore and fear. 
He thunders, and all nature mourns; 
The rock to standing pools he turns, 
Flints spring with fountains at his word, 
And fires and seas confess the Lord.
   multiply folded. On top, one alien hair.
     I put my face to the folds and smell despair
        palpable as salt air
enclosures I passed through on my way where?
Whoever did the weaving appears old
     can only conjure up the faintest trace
        of an abstracted grace,
these precious things, in some unheard-of place?
I perch her on a hill, precariously
     Sun blazes overhead, but her dim room
        (no bigger than the loom)
     is proof against the violence of the sky
From it I further spin what I once called my home:
Endless horizons fading into haze,
   the mornings dawn came up so rosy clear;
     snails in the garden, sheep bells everywhere,
        the brightness of the air,
     terraces, valleys organizing space
   (rugs like rainbows, woven with a grace
     my strands of language barely can express;
        dishrags of dailiness
     dispersed and recombined and freshly gay)
comes to me imbued with images,
slowly and faithfully across the water,
   across the world. It represents a time
     I myself snipped and recombined as rhyme
        as soon as I went home,
     if that is where I am. These rugs recover
the sense of stepping twice into a single river.
yum yum the stars are out. I'll never forget how you
smelled that night. like cheddar cheese melting
under fluorescent light. like a day-old rainbow fish.
what a dish. gotta lick my lips. gotta dream I day-
dream. thorozine brain cloud. rain rain comes com-
ing down.
all over her. there she is on the hill. pale as a posy.
getting soaking wet. hope her petticoats shrink.
well little shepherd girl your gonna kingdom come.
looking so clean. the guardian of every little lamb.
well beep beep sheep I'm moving in.
I'm gonna peep in bo's bodice. lay down darling don't
be modest let me slip my hand in. ohhh that's soft
that's nice that's not used up. ohhh don't cry. wet
what's wet? oh that. heh heh. that's just the rain
lambie pie. now don't squirm. let me put my rubber
on. I'm a wolf in a lamb skin trojan. ohh yeah that's
hard that's good. now don't tighten up. open up be-
bop. lift that little butt up. ummm open wider be-bop.
come on. nothing. can. stop me. now. ohhh ahhh.
isn't that good. my. melancholy be-bop.
Oh don't cry. come on get up. let's dance in the grass.
let's cut a rug let's jitterbug. roll those tiny white
stockings down. bobby sock-o let's flow. come on this
is a dance contest. under the stars, let's alice in the
grass.
let's swing betty boop hoop
let's birdland let's stroll
let's rock let's roll
let's whalebone let's go
let's deodorize the night.
for my love, Charles (1938-2000)
I love you, I love you, I love you, no matter
the world is round and the arctic is cold.
living marl. Say: he is beautiful,
Say: Her Majesty combs her long black hair for hours.
Say: O frills and fronds, I know you
O foot plodding the underside of leaves.
Ms. Lookeast, Ms. Lookeast,
Say: the small throat of sorrow.
Say: Beauty and loss, the dross of centuries.
Say: when I was a young girl in Hong Kong
Say: you always love them in the beginning,
Say: beauty and terror, beauty and terror.
dancing sonatinas and pungent flowers.
and the fantastical diaspora of tears.
my inky love runs. Tearfully,
Say: I am a very small boy, a very small boy.
who yearns to be punished.
Head Mistress, Head Mistress,
I am a sheep without his fold.
Is the apple half eaten or half whole?
that he is not death, in death there is
Say: there is poetry in his body, poetry
this dead love, this dead love,
this white percale, white of hell, of heavenly shale.
I am that yellow girl, that famished yellow girl
Say: a refuge between sleeping and dying.
creeps in his petty pompadour.
Say: I have seen the small men of my generation
of the measles near the bay.
day until Saturday, the true Sabbath, when they shall
Say: I am dismayed by your cloying promiscuousness
Say: amaduofu, amaduofu.
Say: he recites the lost autobiography of Camus.
I cashed my welfare check and felt good.
Admit that you loved your mother,
Suddenly, my terrible childhood made sense.
all ye need to know on earth all ye need to know.
Victoria Peak Way and a slip-of-a-boy climbed off his ox:
on his cankered lip.
of a blessed life, say:
Say: despair, despair, despair.
I embody frugality and ecstasy.
O how he loved his lambs.
Say: another mai tai before your death.
Another boyfriend, Italianesque.
Say: I am the sentence which shall at last elude her.
Say:
Say: A brush of jade, a jasper plow furrow.
Say: A scentless camellia bush bloodied the afternoon.
When did I become the master of suburban bliss?
The language of the masters is the language of the aggressors.
enrolled in a class to improve our accent.
to drop an article, mispronounce an R.
O onerous sibilants, O onomatopoetic glibness.
How could we write poetry in a time like this?
Willfully laconic, deceptively disguised as a love poem.
Say:
Your engorging dict-
atorial flesh
grazed mine.
Would you have loved me more if I were black?
And you, relentless Sinophile,
My turn to objectify you.
the face of an orphan static with flies,
Hills and canyons, robbed by sun, leave us nothing.
I love roads:
The goddesses that dwell
Far along invisible
Are my favorite gods.
Roads go on
While we forget, and are
Forgotten like a star
That shoots and is gone.
On this earth 'tis sure
Anything that doth fade
So soon, so long endure:
The hill road wet with rain
In the sun would not gleam
Like a winding stream
If we trod it not again.
They are lonely
While we sleep, lonelier
For lack of the traveller
From dawn's twilight
And all the clouds like sheep
On the mountains of sleep
They wind into the night.
The next turn may reveal
Heaven: upon the crest
The close pine clump, at rest
Ancl black, may Hell conceal.
Often footsore, never
Though long and steep and dreary,
As it winds on for ever.
Helen of the roads,
The mountain ways of Wales
And the Mabinogion tales,
Is one of the true gods,
Abiding in the trees,
The threes and fours so wise,
The larger companies,
That by the roadside be,
And beneath the rafter
Else uninhabited
Excepting by the dead;
And it is her laughter
At morn and night I hear
Bright irrelevant things,
And when the chanticleer
Calls back to their own night
Troops that make loneliness
Now all roads lead to France
And heavy is the tread
Of the living; but the dead
Returning lightly dance:
Whatever the road bring
To me or take from me,
They keep me company
With their pattering,
Crowding the solitude
Of the loops over the downs,
Hushing the roar of towns
 and their brief multitude.
It's easy to believe you can go back
Whenever you desire, jump in the car
Among the buildings spread across the farm,
Out toward the pastures, woods, and fields.
There is music in the leaves, in the dense
Columns of green corn. The wind lays down
The tune. You can play it, too, simply
By walking with eyes closed, arms
Stretched out, lightly striking the stalks.
Who wouldn't desire, like the children
Lost in so many similar fields,
To sit down on the turned earth and drift
Away on the rhythms of his own
First possible death? Rescuing
Voices come closer, veer off. Flashlight beams
Strobe over your head. You do not care.
The walls and roofs collapsing with a final
Percussive clap, since you last walked those fields.
No one you will ever know works that land now.
It is as green as Eden. Life rises in the roots, in the leaves.
Coldly, sadly descends
The autumn-evening. The field
Strewn with its dank yellow drifts
Of wither'd leaves, and the elms,
Fade into dimness apace,
From a few boys late at their play!
The lights come out in the street,
Solemn, unlighted, austere,
Through the gathering darkness, arise
The chapel-walls, in whose bound
Thou, my father! art laid.
There thou dost lie, in the gloom
Of the autumn evening. But ah! 
That word, gloom, to my mind
Brings thee back, in the light
Of thy radiant vigour, again;
In the gloom of November we pass'd
Days not dark at thy side;
Seasons impair'd not the ray
Of thy buoyant cheerfulness clear.
Such thou wast! and I stand
In the autumn evening, and think
Of bygone autumns with thee.
Fifteen years have gone round
Since thou arosest to tread,
In the summer-morning, the road
Of death, at a call unforeseen,
Sudden. For fifteen years,
We who till then in thy shade
Rested as under the boughs
Of a mighty oak, have endured
Sunshine and rain as we might,
Bare, unshaded, alone,
Lacking the shelter of thee.
O strong soul, by what shore
Tarriest thou now? For that force,
Surely, has not been left vain!
Somewhere, surely afar,
In the sounding labour-house vast
Of being, is practised that strength,
Zealous, beneficent, firm!
Yes, in some far-shining sphere,
Conscious or not of the past,
Still thou performest the word
Prompt, unwearied, as here!
Still thou upraisest with zeal
The humble good from the ground,
Sternly repressest the bad!
Still, like a trumpet, dost rouse
Those who with half-open eyes
Tread the border-land dim
'Twixt vice and virtue; reviv'st,
This was thy life upon earth.
What is the course of the life
Most men eddy about
Chatter and love and hate,
Gather and squander, are raised
Aloft, are hurl'd in the dust,
Striving blindly, achieving
Who or what they have been,
More than he asks what waves,
In the moonlit solitudes mild
Of the midmost Ocean, have swell'd,
Foam'd for a moment, and gone.
And there are some, whom a thirst
Ardent, unquenchable, fires,
Not with the crowd to be spent,
Not without aim to go round
In an eddy of purposeless dust,
Effort unmeaning and vain.
Ah yes! some of us strive
Not without action to die
Fruitless, but something to snatch
From dull oblivion, nor all
Glut the devouring grave!
Path to a clear-purposed goal,
A long, steep journey, through sunk
Gorges, o'er mountains in snow.
Then on the height, comes the storm.
Thunder crashes from rock
To rock, the cataracts reply,
Lightnings dazzle our eyes.
Roaring torrents have breach'd
The track, the stream-bed descends
In the place where the wayfarer once
Boils o'er its borders! aloft
The unseen snow-beds dislodge
Their hanging ruin; alas,
Havoc is made in our train!
Friends, who set forth at our side,
Falter, are lost in the storm.
We, we only are left!
With frowning foreheads, with lips
Sternly compress'd, we strain on,
Come to the end of our way,
To the lonely inn 'mid the rocks;
Where the gaunt and taciturn host
Stands on the threshold, the wind
Holds his lantern to scan
Our storm-beat figures, and asks:
Whom in our party we bring?
Whom we have left in the snow?
Sadly we answer: We bring
Only ourselves! we lost
Sight of the rest in the storm.
Hardly ourselves we fought through,
Stripp'd, without friends, as we are.
Friends, companions, and train,
The avalanche swept from our side.
But thou woulds't not alone 
Be saved, my father! alone 
Conquer and come to thy goal,
Leaving the rest in the wild.
We were weary, and we
Fearful, and we in our march
Fain to drop down and to die.
Still thou turnedst, and still
Beckonedst the trembler, and still
Gavest the weary thy hand.
If, in the paths of the world,
Stones might have wounded thy feet,
Toil or dejection have tried
Thy spirit, of that we saw
Cheerful, and helpful, and firm!
Therefore to thee it was given
Many to save with thyself;
And, at the end of thy day,
O faithful shepherd! to come,
Bringing thy sheep in thy hand.
And through thee I believe
In the noble and great who are gone;
Pure souls honour'd and blest
Such, so soulless, so poor,
Seem'd but a dream of the heart,
Seem'd but a cry of desire.
Yes! I believe that there lived
Others like thee in the past,
Not like the men of the crowd
Who all round me to-day
Bluster or cringe, and make life
Hideous, and arid, and vile;
But souls temper'd with fire,
Fervent, heroic, and good,
Helpers and friends of mankind.
Shall I not call you? Because
Not as servants ye knew
Your Father's innermost mind,
His, who unwillingly sees
Yours is the praise, if mankind
Hath not as yet in its march
Fainted, and fallen, and died!
See! In the rocks of the world
Marches the host of mankind,
A feeble, wavering line.
Marshall'd them, gave them their goal.
Ah, but the way is so long!
Years they have been in the wild!
Sore thirst plagues them, the rocks
Rising all round, overawe;
Factions divide them, their host
Threatens to break, to dissolve.
Else, of the myriads who fill
That army, not one shall arrive;
Sole they shall stray; in the rocks
Stagger for ever in vain,
Die one by one in the waste.
Then, in such hour of need
Of your fainting, dispirited race,
Ye, like angels, appear,
Radiant with ardour divine!
Beacons of hope, ye appear!
Languor is not in your heart,
Weakness is not in your word,
Weariness not on your brow.
Ye alight in our van! at your voice,
Panic, despair, flee away.
Ye move through the ranks, recall
The stragglers, refresh the outworn,
Praise, re-inspire the brave!
Order, courage, return.
Eyes rekindling, and prayers,
Follow your steps as ye go.
Ye fill up the gaps in our files,
Strengthen the wavering line,
Stablish, continue our march,
On, to the bound of the waste,
On, to the City of God.

Stone worn
Overgrown
Pristine thorns
Sheep shorn
Tinkling below
Roofless walls
Rooks overlook
I told you so 
Babbles the brook
Before you shut
Scissors to cut
Shear skin deep
Underneath wool
Expose the sheep
Whose leg you pull
 but that notable double-crossing chess game
 reveals trouble in the desert,
 trouble in the lineage, trouble in the choices,
 trouble in the allegory.
 What more to say about the Father of everything
 from the inevitable, suspicious, atheist
 daughter
 the beautiful, longed-for, pensive son.
 They are all male singletons:
 one A, one I and one One
 (undercounting various brothers
 who do not matter in the tally;
 nor enumerating most sisters,
 though they certainly existed).
 Single, except for the One who sent an
 androgyne messenger
 who rammed the ram into the thicket,
 who filled the curly ewe,
 who took her mewling newborn sheep.
 Thereupon the regime of human sacrifice
 was declared theologically finished.
 But not politically and ideologically finished.
 Clear enough?
The shoe repairman works behind the married shoes,
everything cozy in the glass displays, laces paired
propped up, the wooden tongues of shoe horns, poised
to serve the inanimate world ... He comes out mildly
attentive, soft accent, possibly a Scottish
childhood, possibly sheep to tend ... Clear day,
first summer divorced in Berkeley, a time of seamless, indescribable grief; he waits kindly in his blue apron,
fingering the well-worn inner sole, and I am grateful
for those who serve us knowing nothing of our lives ...
*
The cleaner waits behind the silver bell;
on the counter. He greets me with pleasant chatter,
searches through the coats, some left for years,
he says; they make a soft blue whistle as they circulate
on the ovals like the ones under those automatic boats.
As the clothes pass, little checks and prints under
passing by quickly not bothering to greet me. Odd now,
*
I watch the young butcher flipping over the young
chicken: he takes one wing and sort of spins it,
first on its back, flinging the trimmed, watery
lemon-colored fat into the trash, then before
he starts on the legs he puts his hand so deeply in
that the finger comes out the neck ... The other butcher
sets the slab of beef under the saw: the riveting
intricate swirl as the dead flesh pulls away;
ticking, then the carcass swings and swings ...
Somehow I thought we would know everything
through the flesh. Perhaps. But my days have become
spirit. The young butcher splits the chicken
down the back, seems to enjoy the crack of the knife
as it enters the bone, so I try to. Housewives lean
against the cool glass to convey holiday news and he
responds without really looking up; I love that.
*
what? past the French Hotel, the glint of tiny spoons
so briefly and soberly allowed to rest on white saucers,
like me, hearty and hesitant, not wanting to write it,
not wanting to ruin the perfection of the poem
by writing it . . . At the dentist, the little mirror,
the dinosaur prong is put into the mouth. Mouth:
the first darkness. Nearby: the mobile with straw
eyeless fishes. The dentist will go home to her family,
having briefly reached inside the visible mystery
and found nothing ... I imagine Wisdom in the text
is like this, creating the cosmos from the mind of God,
looking interested and competent; she touches
the physical place with her prong, and the pain shines ...
Oh dear! I better
Highlight Actions
Enable or disable annotations
heiress still lives through winter in her Spartan cottage;
her sheep still graze above the sea.
is first selectman in our village;
Thirsting for
the hierarchic privacy
she buys up all
the eyesores facing her shore,
and lets them fall.
who seemed to leap from an L. L. Bean
catalogue. His nine-knot yawl
was auctioned off to lobstermen.
And now our fairy
decorator brightens his shop for fall;
there is no money in his work,
I watched for love-carsI watched for love-cars "watching the lovers was not mine, but from an anecdote about Walt Whitman in his old age" The notes in Robert Lowell: Selected Poems (2006) explains the anecdote: "In the early 1970s, Elizabeth Bishop told Frank Bidart that the source of the anecdote was Logan Pearsall Smith's Unforgotten Years (1939): Almost every afternoon my father would take Walt Whitman driving in the Park; it was an unfailing interest to them to drive as close as they could behind buggies in which pairs of lovers were seated, and observe the degree of slope towards each other, or "buggy-angle," as they called it, of these couples; and if ever they saw this angle of approximation narrowed to an embrace, my father and Walt Whitman, who had ever honored that joy-giving power of nature symbolized under the name of Venus, would return home with happy hearts. (p. 99) . Lights turned down,
they lay together, hull to hull,
where the graveyard shelvesshelves Slopes down  on the town. . . .
A car radio bleats,
my ill-spirit sob in each blood cell,
as if my hand were at its throat. . . .
only skunks, that search
in the moonlight for a bite to eat.
They march on their soles up Main Street:
under the chalk-dry and sparspar Nautical term for a mast spire
of the Trinitarian Church.
I stand on top
a mother skunk with her columncolumn Figuratively, a military formation  of kittens swills the garbage pail
She jabs her wedge-head in a cup
of sour cream, drops her ostrich tail,
and will not scare.
The sun that brief December day 
Rose cheerless over hills of gray, 
And, darkly circled, gave at noon 
A sadder light than waning moon. 
Slow tracing down the thickening sky 
Its mute and ominous prophecy, 
A portent seeming less than threat, 
It sank from sight before it set. 
A chill no coat, however stout, 
Of homespun stuff could quite shut out, 
A hard, dull bitterness of cold, 
That checked, mid-vein, the circling race 
Of life-blood in the sharpened face, 
The coming of the snow-storm told. 
The wind blew east; we heard the roar 
Of Ocean on his wintry shore, 
And felt the strong pulse throbbing there 
Beat with low rhythm our inland air. 
Brought in the wood from out of doors, 
Littered the stalls, and from the mows 
Heard the horse whinnying for his corn; 
And, sharply clashing horn on horn, 
Impatient down the stanchion rows 
The cattle shake their walnut bows; 
While, peering from his early perch 
And down his querulous challenge sent. 
Unwarmed by any sunset light 
The gray day darkened into night, 
A night made hoary with the swarm 
And whirl-dance of the blinding storm, 
As zigzag, wavering to and fro, 
And ere the early bedtime came 
The white drift piled the window-frame, 
And through the glass the clothes-line posts 
Looked in like tall and sheeted ghosts. 
So all night long the storm roared on: 
The morning broke without a sun; 
In tiny spherule traced with lines 
In starry flake, and pellicle, 
All day the hoary meteor fell; 
And, when the second morning shone, 
We looked upon a world unknown, 
On nothing we could call our own. 
Around the glistening wonder bent 
The blue walls of the firmament, 
A universe of sky and snow! 
The old familiar sights of ours 
Took marvellous shapes; strange domes and towers 
Rose up where sty or corn-crib stood, 
Or garden-wall, or belt of wood; 
A smooth white mound the brush-pile showed, 
A fenceless drift what once was road; 
The bridle-post an old man sat 
The well-curb had a Chinese roof; 
And even the long sweep, high aloof, 
In its slant splendor, seemed to tell 
A prompt, decisive man, no breath 
Well pleased, (for when did farmer boy 
Count such a summons less than joy?) 
Our buskins on our feet we drew; 
With mittened hands, and caps drawn low, 
To guard our necks and ears from snow, 
We cut the solid whiteness through. 
And, where the drift was deepest, made 
A tunnel walled and overlaid 
With dazzling crystal: we had read 
And to our own his name we gave, 
With many a wish the luck were ours 
We reached the barn with merry din, 
And roused the prisoned brutes within. 
The old horse thrust his long head out, 
And grave with wonder gazed about; 
And forth his speckled harem led; 
The oxen lashed their tails, and hooked, 
And mild reproach of hunger looked; 
Shook his sage head with gesture mute, 
And emphasized with stamp of foot. 
All day the gusty north-wind bore 
The loosening drift its breath before; 
Low circling round its southern zone, 
The sun through dazzling snow-mist shone. 
No church-bell lent its Christian tone 
To the savage air, no social smoke 
Curled over woods of snow-hung oak. 
A solitude made more intense 
The shrieking of the mindless wind, 
The moaning tree-boughs swaying blind, 
And on the glass the unmeaning beat 
Of ghostly finger-tips of sleet. 
Beyond the circle of our hearth 
No welcome sound of toil or mirth 
Unbound the spell, and testified 
Of human life and thought outside. 
We minded that the sharpest ear 
The buried brooklet could not hear, 
The music of whose liquid lip 
Had been to us companionship, 
And, in our lonely life, had grown 
To have an almost human tone. 
As night drew on, and, from the crest 
Of wooded knolls that ridged the west, 
The sun, a snow-blown traveller, sank 
From sight beneath the smothering bank, 
We piled, with care, our nightly stack 
The oaken log, green, huge, and thick, 
And on its top the stout back-stick; 
The knotty forestick laid apart, 
And filled between with curious art 
The ragged brush; then, hovering near, 
We watched the first red blaze appear, 
Heard the sharp crackle, caught the gleam 
On whitewashed wall and sagging beam, 
Until the old, rude-furnished room 
Burst, flower-like, into rosy bloom; 
While radiant with a mimic flame 
Outside the sparkling drift became, 
And through the bare-boughed lilac-tree 
Our own warm hearth seemed blazing free. 
The crane and pendent trammels showed, 
While childish fancy, prompt to tell 
The meaning of the miracle, 
When fire outdoors burns merrily, 
The moon above the eastern wood 
Shone at its full; the hill-range stood 
Transfigured in the silver flood, 
Its blown snows flashing cold and keen, 
Dead white, save where some sharp ravine 
Took shadow, or the sombre green 
Of hemlocks turned to pitchy black 
Against the whiteness at their back. 
For such a world and such a night 
Most fitting that unwarming light, 
To make the coldness visible. 
Shut in from all the world without, 
We sat the clean-winged hearth about, 
Content to let the north-wind roar 
In baffled rage at pane and door, 
While the red logs before us beat 
The frost-line back with tropic heat; 
And ever, when a louder blast 
Shook beam and rafter as it passed, 
The merrier up its roaring draught 
The great throat of the chimney laughed; 
The house-dog on his paws outspread 
Laid to the fire his drowsy head, 
And, for the winter fireside meet, 
The mug of cider simmered slow, 
The apples sputtered in a row, 
And, close at hand, the basket stood 
What matter how the night behaved? 
What matter how the north-wind raved? 
Blow high, blow low, not all its snow 
How strange it seems, with so much gone 
Of life and love, to still live on! 
Ah, brother! only I and thou 
The dear home faces whereupon 
That fitful firelight paled and shone. 
Henceforward, listen as we will, 
The voices of that hearth are still; 
Those lighted faces smile no more. 
We tread the paths their feet have worn, 
From Michigan our son writes, How many elk? 
How many big horn sheep? It's spring, 
and soon they'll be gone above timberline, 
climbing to tundra by summer. Some boys 
are born to wander, my wife says, but rocky slopes 
with spruce and Douglas fir are home. 
He tried the navy, the marines, but even the army 
wouldn't take him, not with a foot like that. 
Maybe it's in the genes. I think of wild-eyed years 
till I was twenty, and cringe. I loved motorcycles, 
in mountains, too many icy spots in spring. 
Doctors stitched back his scalp, hoisted him in traction 
like a twisted frame. I sold the motorbike to a junkyard, 
but half his foot was gone. Last month, he cashed 
his paycheck at the Harley house, roared off 
with nothing but a backpack, waving his headband, 
leaning into a downhill curve and gone.
Avenge, O Lord, thy slaughter'd saints, whose bones 
Forget not: in thy book record their groans 
The vales redoubl'd to the hills, and they 
The triple tyrant; that from these may grow 
Early may fly the Babylonian woe.
1.
Somewhere Indians are walking across America.
One is a woman caught in stride
between two white birches, her eyes
on the ground, her mouth
biting open a word while the wind
shreds the lake behind her.
2.
A boy wakes alone in cold New England air.
A white blanket of sheep has unrolled
across the hill, and the yellow dogs
who ran and ran have now disappeared.
3.
A glass necklace floats on her white breast
just as she herself floats inside his lens
her small black eardrops hang perfectly still,
her long white neck and cleavage ready to be
frozen forever by the touch of his finger.
4.
As the deer ate from the deep lawn
and the fish jumped near the willow trees,
the big white ferry paused briefly before sliding
back again across the lake, completely
unaware of its brightness and its beauty.
1
I close my eyes and I see a dot.
It becomes a spot of light.
It grows into the size of a person
who distances away
until it returns to a spot of light,
a dot.

2
Like communion bread,
your words dissolve in my mouth
and never die.

3
just sing your song till the end.

4
The bone-city I am choked by
is also salt
also sugar
also boiling water
in the kettle with no lid.

5
Ask not how many houses were built.
Ask how many residents remained in the houses.

6
The flame opens like a giant plant
swallowing them one by one
with their lost and found sheep.

7
She whose song
has no beginning
She whose voice faded
Where is she?
Where is she?

8
Dreams come in two types:
vertical and horizontal.
Tell me the shape of your dream
and I will tell you where you come from.

9
Fire and light
both sting.
We go to sleep when the other half
of the globe wakes up.
Night and day
crammed with dreams.

10
Your look
passes through me
like lightning.

11
The butterfly that flew a moment ago
over the killed ones
was the soul
searching for home.

12
Our time together
has ripened
and smashed like berries.

13
Can your camera capture
fear in the eyes
of mother-sparrow, see
the broken eggs in her eyes?

14
A little air means so much for the bird.
In the air, a full world extends.
The clouds gather and then separate.
The leaves wave to each other.
For the bird, everything hangs in the air.

15
The pomegranate seeds
scattered with our steps
were not from heaven.

16
My paper boat that drifted into the river
with the world behind it
had a special note.
It may arrive one day,
although late,
all truths come late.

17
Dried leaves
over there
our first yearnings.

18
The shoes by the door
will not fit them when they return.

19
She counts the pebbles by her fingers.
The other pebbles under water
are losses outside her hands.

20
Specks of sand
scattered
from the fingers
our people.

21
The sun reveals
a hole in the boat,
a glow in the fins
of fish still breathing.

22
The day and the night
divide our steps on the road
as they equally
divide the world.

23
I was born.
I write poetry.
I will die.

24
Her shadow
is still here
feeding the birds.
the box on your lap, open it up. open your lap, open it up and your arms, a is for arm. b is for box, c connection, go on, break the seal, unfold the replacement net
Moses climbed up Mount Nebo, high above Moab.
Tendons winced as he bent to retie a sandal, and haze
flooded his vision, which had nothing to see
(or black rock and scrub thorn only) until he stopped
and said, I will wait here for the voice of the Most High.
Gilead, the hills of Ephraim and Manasseh,
from Judah to the western sea as far as Zoar.
And said: Your eyes have seen what I promised,
yet, because at Meribah-Kadesh
you failed to manifest the holiness I am,
you do not go in.
At that distance and from the heights
Moses stood and watched as the children
of Israel began the westward trek.
His sight strengthened and he saw each one.
The mother, thin and staring, bent down
who cried and then laughed.
The young brothers with new beards
and faces blackened by years in Sinai, strode along
carrying all they had rolled up in a sheepskin.
The white-haired elder and his mourning wife,
whose only daughter was lost in the desert,
stalked slowly forward without speaking.
discussed it quietly and held hands.
A concert of voices, murmurs, cries, laughter,
rising, falling, babbling like water,
the fountain of Meribah-Kadesh that sprang
from a wall of rock in the desert
when Moses struck it with his staff.
Days of his life returned to him.
during the hours of instruction. He recalled
white noonday and the shadow of his hand
raised to strike the Egyptian overseer;
the brush-tree that spoke out in tongues of fire;
among bulrushes as seabirds called overhead;
mutiny and lightning in the desert;
a pillar of smoke by day, and fire by night.
The moment drew near as those he was
bound to and had contended with went up
to a land of hills dusted with the first spring green.
Sheep stopped their grazing to stare; like an intake
of breath, a lull suspended the low hum
hovering around hillsides in flower.
His eyes filled with tears. And silver bands of sun
broke from a veil of cloud overhead
down to the plain of Moab, lighting the face
of Joshua on one side, so that half
remained in shadow.
At that moment Moses was taken to his people.
His body is said to be buried at Beth-Peor, yet
the grave has never been found.
and Joshua led the Israelites westward into Canaan.
That there are things that can never be the same about
my face, the houses, or the sand, that I was born under the
sign of the sheep, that like Abraham Lincoln I am serious
but also lacking in courage,
That from this yard I have been composing a great speech,
like the drawing of a house that was pencilled by a child,
that curiously, I miss him and my mind is not upon the Pleaides,
that I love the ocean and its foam against the sky,
That I am sneezing like a lion in this garden that he knows
the lilies of his Nile, distant image, breakfast, a flock of birds
and sparrows from the sky,
That I am not the husband of Cassiopeia, that I am not
the southern fish, that I am not the last poet of civilization,
that if I want to go out for a walk and then to find myself
beneath a bank of trees, weary, that this is the life that I had,
That curiously I miss the sound of the rain pounding
on the roof and also all of Oakland, that I miss the sounds of
sparrows dropping from the sky, that there are sparks behind
my eyes, on the radio, and the distant sound of sand blasters,
and breakfast, and every second of it, geometric, smoke
from the chimney of the trees where I was small,
That in January, I met him in a bar, we went
home together, there was a lemon tree in the back yard,
and a coffee house where we stood outside and kissed,
That I have never been there, curiously, and that it never was
the same, the whole of the island, or the paintings of the stars,
fatherly, tied to sparrows as they drop down from the sky,
O rattling frame where I am, I am where there are still
these assignments in the night, to remember the texture
of the leaves on the locust trees in August, under the
moonlight, rounded, through a window in the hills,
That if I stay beneath the pole star in this harmony of
crickets that will sing, the bird sound on the screen,
the wide eyes of the owl form of him still in the dark,
blue, green, with shards of the Pacific,
That I do not know the dreams from which I have come,
sent into the world without the blessing of a kiss, behind the
willow trees, beside the darkened pansies on the deck beside
the ships, rocking, I have written this, across the back of the
sky, wearing a small and yellow shirt, near the reptile house,
mammalian, no bigger than the herd,
That I wrote the history of the war waged between the
Peloponnesians and the south, that I like to run through
driven here, like the rain is driven into things, into the
ground, beside the broken barns, by the railroad tracks,
beside the sea, I, Thucydides, having written this, having
grown up near the ocean.
The smell of snow, stinging in nostrils as the wind lifts it from a beach
Eve-shuttering, mixed with sand, or when snow lies under the street lamps and on all
And the air is emptied to an uplifting gassiness
That turns lungs to winter waterwings, buoying, and the bright white night
Hours after swimming, sitting thinking biting at a hangnail
Taken with a slight spitting motion from between teeth and whanged into place
(Boards and sawdust) and the nail set is ridged with cold
Permanently as marble, always degrees cooler than the rooms of air it lies in
Felt as you lay your cheek upon the counter on which sits a blue-banded cup
Pebbles in a pocket embed the seam with grains of sand
Which, as they will, have found their way into a pattern between foot and bedfoot
It seems when snow in fat, hand-stuffed flakes falls slow and steady in the sea
At your feet (in boots) a Christmas tree naked of needles
Still wound with swags of tarnishing tinsel, faintly alarming as the thought
Of damp electricity or sluggish lightning and for your health desiring pains
Rolls down the shimmering blacktop and mowed grass juice thickens the air
On a dotted diagonal and there, ah, is the answer:
Starlings, bullies of birdland, lousing up
And above these thoughts there waves another tangle but one parched with heat
Did not like it, January, laid out on a bed of ice, disgorging
February, shaped like a flounder, and March with her steel head pocketbook,
Who will of course be voted Miss Best Liked (she expects it),
And June, with a toothpaste smile, fresh from her flea bath, and gross July,
Flexing itself, and steamy August, with thighs and eyes to match, and September
Diving into blue October, dour November, and deadly dull December which now
And then with a surprised blank look produces from its hand the ace of trumps
Global, blue, Columbian, a blue dull definite and thin as the first day
Without a plan to be its own best monument its skyline set in stacks
A flatcar-trailer piled with five of the cheaper sort of yachts, tarpaulined,
Where beached boats bask and terraced cliffs are hung with oranges
Among dark star-gleaming leaves, and, descending the dizzying rough stairs
Where kids in kapok ice-skate and play at Secret City as the sun
Sets before dinner, the snow on fields turns pink and under the hatched ice
The water slides darkly and over it a never before seen liquefaction of the sun
In a chemical yellow greener than sulphur a flash of petroleum by-product
Unbelievable, unwanted and as lovely as though someone you knew all your life
Said the one inconceivable thing and then went on washing dishes: the sky
Flows with impersonal passion and loosening jet trails (eyes tearing from the cold)
And on the beach, between foam frozen in a thick scalloped edging so like
Weird cheek-mottling pillowcase embroidery, on the water-darkened sand the waves
Keep free of frost, a gull strangles on a length of nylon fishline and the dog
Trots proudly off, tail held high, to bury a future dinner among cut grass on a dune:
The ice boats furl their sails and all pile into cars and go off to the super market
Its inviting foods and cleansers sold under tunes with sealed in memory-flavor
In its parking lot vast as the kiss to which is made the most complete surrender
In a setting of leaves, backs of stores, a house on a rise admired for being
Somewhat older than some others (prettier, too?) a man in a white apron embraces a car
Briefly in the cold with his eyes as one might hug oneself for warmth for love
Maps out new roads so that, driving at right angles to the wind, clouds in ranks
Contrive in diminishing perspective a part of a picture postcard of a painting
Over oak scrub where a filling station has: gas, a locked toilet (to keep dirt in)
Lifted; black water, slashed with white; and that which is, which is beyond
Happiness or love or mixed with them or more than they or less, unchanging change,
Day of Satan's painful duty!
Earth shall vanish, hot and sooty;
So says Virtue, so says Beauty.
Ah! what terror shall be shaping
Cats from every bag escaping!
Now the trumpet's invocation
Calls the dead to condemnation;
All receive an invitation.
Death and Nature now are quaking,
And the late lamented, waking,
In their breezy shrouds are shaking.
Lo! the Ledger's leaves are stirring,
And the Clerk, to them referring,
Makes it awkward for the erring.
When the Judge appears in session,
We shall all attend confession,
Loudly preaching non-suppression.
How shall I then make romances
Mitigating circumstances?
Even the just must take their chances.
King whose majesty amazes,
Save thou him who sings thy praises;
Fountain, quench my private blazes.
Pray remember, sacred Saviour,
Mine the playful hand that gave your
Death-blow. Pardon such behavior.
Seeking me, fatigue assailed thee,
Calvary's outlook naught availed thee;
Now 'twere cruel if I failed thee.
Pray thy prejudices smother
Ere we meet to try each other.
Sighs of guilt my conscience gushes,
And my face vermilion flushes;
Spare me for my pretty blushes.
Thief and harlot, when repenting,
Me with sign of like relenting.
If too bold is my petition
I'll receive with due submission
When thy sheep thou hast selected
From the goats, may I, respected,
Stand amongst them undetected.
When offenders are indited,
And with trial-flames ignited,
Elsewhere I'll attend if cited.
Ashen-hearted, prone and prayerful,
When of death I see the air full,
Lest I perish too be careful.
On that day of lamentation,
When, to enjoy the conflagration,
Men come forth, O be not cruel:

In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread.
The grizzled axman squinted at Honest Abe,
The six feet four of him, gaunt, sad of face,
The hands to split a log or cradle a babe,
The cracked palm hat, the homespun of his race.
Extols the shepherd for cudgeling tyranny;
The wolf, convulsed with indignation deep,
Accuses the shepherd of murdering liberty.
So over seven-acre field and up-along across the down

Because, when you were nine, your father
was murdered,
betrayed.
Because the traveler was betrayed by those with
whom he had the right to seek
Because the universe then allowed a creature
stronger, taller, more
ruthless than you
to fasten around your neck a thick wooden wheel
impossible
to throw off.
Because at nine your cunning was not equal
to iron-fastened
immense wood.
Because, stripped of what was his from birth, the slave
at ten
outwitted

because your neck
carries it still, Scarcity is the mother of being.

Hour in which betrayal and slavery
are the great teachers.
Hour in which acquisition
looks like, and for
a moment is, safety.
Hour in which the earth, looking into
a mirror, names what it sees
by the history of weapons.
Hour from which I cannot wake.
prostrate himself before
the conqueror of the world
though Alexander the Great, drunk, had

hands. The Great Khan was gracious.
had refused invitations from the King of Gold
and even the emperor of Hang-chou, now,
in his old age, he discovered he was
tired of waiting for apotheosis.
At last invited to court by the terrifying
conqueror of the world, he said Yes.

He traveled for a year and a half
following the route the Great Khan
himself had taken. He passed valley after valley
that, years later, still were filled with
ungathered, whitening bones.

He bowed his head with clasped hands.
The most powerful man on earth
then asked him to teach him the secret

the elixir
that allows men to cheat death.
Temujin was in pain. Temujin
though surrounded, all his life, by death.
Now he had fallen from a horse. The injury
had not entirely, after much
time, healed. He brooded about death, his
death. Now he must conquer the ancient
secret
that would bend
heaven to his need.
elixir.
poor far edge. In order to see the rich
debris that must lie at the bottom of the sea,
he sucked and sucked till he swallowed
the ocean.

he summoned
each. Each eloquent spokesman
praised abnegations, offered transformation, even

Best, he said, was the wife or daughter or mother of
an enemy.

each day as if hunting were the purpose of life, work
sufficient for a man. As a boy he discovered his
work when he had a wooden wheel around his neck:
to escape the wheel.
Every single thing tastes like, reeks with
the power that put it there. Weapons
keep in place
who gets rewarded how much for what. The world

is good at telling itself this is a lie. The world.
Each unit made up of
ten: ten soldiers
whose leader reports to a unit of one
hundred soldiers, whose leader reports to a unit of one
thousand soldiers, whose leader reports to a unit of
ten thousand.
With iron logic he had raised the great structure
from the flat
internecine earth
At family gatherings,
a Family Friend liked gathering
the girls to make us sing rounds.
We always wanted the spooky one,
Have you seen the ghost of Tom?

with the rest all gone,
which he pretended not to hear
because who knows, any one of us
might blow his cover at any minute,
unpredictable little liars that we were,
the girl cousins, talking preteen trash
about him, the things he likes to do,
for example gather the girl cousins
and make them sing against their wills.
His personal favorite was 
Tender Shepherd, tender Shepherd,
Let me help you count your sheep.
One in the meadow, two in the garden,
Three in the nursery, fast asleep.
One Christmas there were only 
three of us, so we sang 
the round with one part missing.

1. The Winter: 1748
A little satin like wind at the door.
on her head a goat-white wig,
on her cheek a dollop of mole.
She has entered the evening, and I
her room with its hazel light.
a stand, perfect in its shadow but
a swath of door. It cups
in its skull-curved closure
clay hair stays, a pouch of wig talc
that snows at random and lends to the table
a neck-shaped ring.
fingers below of leaves or carp.
where a village adjourns to a frozen river.
ale tents, the musk of chestnuts,
when the flow revisits. Or why
is a method of gliding,
the self for those moments
weightless and preened as my leather companion.
have frozen, or wait in some stasis
like flowers. Perhaps they are stunned
an image perhaps, something
rushing above in their own likeness,
silver and blade-thin at the rim of the world.
There are backflows of broom and mayweed,
coal rillets
slick on the mine path.
like the stiffened tails of lions.
I walk toward a village of perfect exchange:
a raspberry vine. . . .
our tallow candles, each turn
in a trough of sheep fat
of spitting and cast to the walls
an equal division of soot and light,
a peach and char.
Through the windows,
great kilns cast the shadows of scent jars.
entering, that coming away, icicles thick
in the drift tunnels, our lungs half functioning,
like a room with a brook running under it.
When the earth shudders just over our heads,
we say that the lions are walking,
down from the marsh pond, out through
the seams. We die with their chests
pressed over our chests. In feast position.
In rubble or in bed.
The lions are with us, we say to our children,
although nothing is there but
the bedclothes. They have come for their tails,
that sputter and flare on the bedposts
and mark with their compass-point brilliance
the absolute boundaries of
any world opening under us.

3. Wedgwood: 1790
each upstep is a rasp, each kneeling
the hiss, then downwash of seedpods.
Just a boy, I limped past a pity
of cantering geese, black-beaked with madness,
each with its burden of drunken rider,
Near the treeline, a single deer stepped
into a stillness, watched me from a stillness,
a magical closure of particles, light. Behind me,
the pot banks of Burslem shivered like hives.
I grew, declined. My cane tip
a hail on the cobbles. And each day,
each year, from a salt glaze or green glaze:
the press of the moulder's board, the dip
of the baller's scale. I visited the chemists.
I visited the soil.
One spring, they severed my leg with a surgeon's blade.
I watched the still globe of our earth
particles, light. Then a cough. The thin
lispings of thread under skin.
I walked and re-walked the kiln-room floors,
saw on the rackworks those jasper bodies, cawk-white
and luminous. And where was I going those years
of my life, pigments of gorse and heath
In the royal chambers one morning, I watched
reached up with her forearm and open hand
to the open hand of the glove maker. From her
nails and knuckles to her palm, wrist,
he stroked out a cover of suckling fawn, translucent,
fragile as the inner skin of eggs.
as if she imagined an alternate world, as if
through that dappled membrane, she were held
by a vase still rich with the coal-scent of fire.
And as long as she did not move at all,
there she would stay.
can lead the zero with his only arms
to embrace himself in open fields for all to gape upon.
He unbuttons steel-gray sheets, a knotted top coat,
bares himself, his hole, a vision
as framed by the marker that is
where
his body blew and left enclosure intact,
skeletal innards
enough to make moviegoers ask,
the babies are barely dirty,
their armpits smooth with silky soot
weighted in apartment cycles like
we keep movement in boxes for thunderstorms,
and the railroad leaves a dancing behavior
absorbed by every second thought,
escaping the socket that was his mission,
his body incomplete, to help us
to the maidenhead of Niagara,
a target awakening
the chlorophyll of trees,
their tongues the densest forest
canopy and floor
thigh deep with root rot we sleep on and fold
into growing-whole sheep what becomes of the lot:
I'm herdsman of a flock.
The sheep are my thoughts
And my thoughts are all sensations.
I think with my eyes and my ears
And my hands and feet
And nostrils and mouth.
To think a flower is to see and smell it.
To eat a fruit is to sense its savor.
And that is why, when I feel sad,
In a day of heat, because of so much joy
And lay me down in the grass to rest
And close my sun-warmed eyes,
I feel my whole body relaxed in reality
And know the whole truth and am happy.
I was born as a woman, I talk you to death,
or else you to sleep. What do I have, all the time
in the world, and a voice that swings brass back
and forth, you can hear it, and a focal point where
my face should be. What do I have, I have absolute
power, and what I want is your money, your drool,
and your mind, and the sense of myself as a snake,
and a garter in the grass. Every bone in the snake
is the hipbone, every part of the snake is the hips.
The first sound I make is silence, then sssssshhh,
and lookout sailors who watch the sea, and the boys
who cut and cut and cut and cut and cut the grass.
The writers who write page-turners, and the writers
who repeat themselves. The diamond-cutter kneels
down before me and asks me to hypnotize him, and
I glisten at him and glisten hard, and listen to me and
listen, I tell him. Count your age backward, I tell him.
Become aware of your breathing, and aware of mine
The best dog of the language is Yes and protects you.
The best black-and-white dog of the language is Yes
and goes wherever you go, and you go where I say,
you go anywhere. Why do I do it is easy, I am working
my way through school. Give me the money
for what comes next. When you wake to the fact that you
have a body, you will wake to the fact that not for long.
When you wake you will come when you read the word
hard, or hard to understand me, or impenetrable poetry.
When you put down the book you will come when you
hear the words put down the book,
Some day, I think, there will be people enough
In Froxfield to pick all the blackberries
Out of the hedges of Green Lane, the straight
Broad lane where now September hides herself
In bracken and blackberry, harebell and dwarf gorse.
Today, where yesterday a hundred sheep
Were nibbling, halcyon bells shake to the sway
Of waters that no vessel ever sailed ...
It is a kind of spring: the chaffinch tries
His song. For heat it is like summer too.
Or heed if time be still the same, until
The lane ends and once more all is the same.
 

 

As if your half-witted tongue
 Spoke with an eloquence
 Death bestows, I heard your voice
 Layers of cemetery loam:
 In the shuttered half-dark, my eyes
 Soft feather-turnings. What kept me
 Separate the broiling sun
 Of intellect now shone on fiercely:
 In the sheep-pens stinking
 Of dung and lanolin,
 Swollen side and listened
 For the lamb the way
 The night sky listens
 To the synapse-fire
 Of meteors, the fibrillating
 Heartbeat of the stars.
 I heard the cells crackle
 Into being, the embryonic
 Brain begin to burn:
 Hunger. Thirst. Beneath my ear
 My own disastrous birthing,
 The umbilicus strangling
 Like a whip around my neck,
 Shoved through the momentary
 Dying revealed to me my birth,
 How half my brain went dark,
 One side of a universe
 Pinched out like a candle:
 Just smart enough to sense
 Even my death was the thrust
 Of a bewildering punchline: On Thanksgiving
 Morning mouthwatering
 Pain shoved like a spit
was the syringe. And around it was silence. My father
gazed at my mother, and she back at him. Slowly,
faltering, he began to speak. I was seized by
an unusual shuddering. I recall that he used the word fate,
we could all fall asleep. We would stay together
for all time. And evade the uncertainty in mortifying 
with her husband and two children, Nelly and Gyurika.
My eyes have closed, but thine, yet still are open, father mine,
I believe, in one homeland I believe, in the eternal 
sent him to Toulouse. My mind could not comprehend. Then
Hungarians broke into the flat. They were looking for the family. 
The nanny quickly threw a quilt onto six-month-old Tomika,
She knitted pullovers, each more beautiful than the next, so as not
to feel the pain. She went to Pest to learn a trade,
nineteen-forty-four came. On March 15, one of my teachers said,
invaded. From then on, it was obligatory to wear the star.
Through the intervention of the medical officer and the Lord Lieutenant, my father
could have stayed out. I had to move to the ghetto with my mother. My
our street they stood, to bid farewell. Father acknowledged
them, but already he was just waiting
for the end. He had aged by decades. Then the injection,
the one I already spoke of, turned up on the table with the
before being loaded onto the freight cars. The doctor from the next village
they succumbed by the morning. There were eighty of us in the wagon.
An expectant mother gave birth on the way. But with no water, my father
could not save them. There were those who went mad in the freight cars.
in the wagons, they will be brought to you later. Special vehicles
We moved forward in a column of five rows. The bulbs of the searchlights
blinded us in the eyes. A German officer, legs wide apart. He stood there
somewhere far away. Sent us to the right. Had to get undressed
in a room. Then they sent us into another, and the iron door slammed,
bolted shut. Screaming, I pounded on it again and again. We truly 
were lost, as last I understood.... Turning around, the others
They stood there like sheep. Upon their skin, the writing of gooseflesh.

the moon and stars
seek some presence
in the firm quiet, in the hard lack.
A meteor falls in the empty dark.
Someone is absent, the universe is bare
listen, God, are you there?
dockleaves in the yard,
broken teeth eat sadness
in the hayless barn.
Silence knocks on men's doors
but music is heard in space.
Lichen eats the stone,
old arrogance eats peace:
female salt eats being,
angry rust eats blood.
Beetle and seal are dead,
but music is heard in space.
Weak whistle-music moves
beyond Orion's Belt,
silk threads in a cave
float in the dark.
Some player in the solitude
with a hopeful song
but destruction still goes on.
Lard made from whales,
shaving brush from badger hair,
burnt chicks are henfood.
God's lovely creatures last
there's a use for the whistler's tune.
I saw a nest ablaze,
living wood sawdust.
I saw a bird on fire
fall soundless from the air.
I saw the ancient ramparts downed
and silence in the plover field.
I saw the killer's belly feed.
A tongue hangs on a tree,
the magpies' might is right:
a noise of glossy black and white.
I heard their loud artillery.
My ears are withered leaves
from their cacophony,
the discord shuts God's eyes.
But a new musician plays
and music's heard in space.
stay alive with me until
the universe's gown,
once as fresh as cabbage-heart,
is clean again.
Do you remember mothers' milk
like pigeons' milk that feeds the flock?
I saw it last night
in the northern sky
whiter than any blood
dripped from the moon's pap
and every parched grave opened up
and the dough of milk and earth
made a bread forever fresh.
though the sky's a tambourine
danced on by an iron fool
there's harmony beyond his noise.
the dark drink waits for you
and strange music out in space.
Did you see them last night,
night's-eyes brilliant bright
in the black grass
and dandelions en masse,
guineas on velvet once
on an old god's shoulders
dead since the ancient magic passed?
Remember the age of the seed,
kingdom of creatures, power of air?
(Man was not alone,
man and his household.)
Waterfall tumbling from eldertree,
foam on pools like feather capes?
Remember pollen from grasses' ears?
Listen, father, cry no tear
for the cold eternal stones,
ruined towers, groves of graves.
Listen: a bullfinch sings sweetly
(musical anvil in forge)
his harmony's all history.
So, my father, wait a while.
There's no music after dying,
just worlds falling into suns.
Earth will be the brightest bride,
tinwhistles cracking tunes,
platform dances in each town.
Easy, father, wait a while.
But he did not wait.

One day when hope was ill
I took dangerous medicine
and hope died out and left me there,
a naked surgeon, my patient dead.
Like a hen at grips with death
my bill dumb down a well,
my plumage drowned in hate.
I turned my back on Glendarock,
walked for a drink to ease
and to obliterate
pain and fear and grief.
Rats laughed from every hedge,
in the wind a grey crow screeched.
And then I saw the sign
barley like a green fire,
sheets of barley in live waves
quivering its thousand ears,
swaying flames of green
as quietly restless as a child asleep.
I knew then no victory
would go to iron axe or spear:
our mother which art on earth
conserve us safe and clean.
Gale and 'quake knock flat
In spite of joy this peace waned
and ice ran through every vein:
all my pores were locked
and my heart turned,
a piglet on a spit, his blood steam,
panting like a dog's tongue;
the scythe taught the corn its dream.
Caterpillars squashed on the roads,
the swallow snapping back flies,
frogspawn dead in pools dried up,
the horsefly craving blood.
Prick in a vice, a man screams.
The scythe taught the poet his dream.
Barley, cover me up,
let me lie in your field.
I ask of you a green death
in the quiet milk of your stalks.
Yes, the world will survive
with neither you nor me alive.
Damn you, death, I will not then experience
just lie manure on immaculate earth.
Once a perfect standing stone,
fame engraved on my side,
my statement unambiguous,
I had nothing to hide.
But the wind of curiosity blew
with its what? and how? and why?
and blunted the edge of my dignity.
The cow of love rubbed its flank
against my sides and frost burnt:
the grain inside me shrank,
At Wilshire & Santa Monica I saw an opossum
Trying to cross the street. It was late, the street
Was brightly lit, the opossum would take
A few steps forward, then back away from the breath
Of moving traffic. People coming out of the bars
Would approach, as if to help it somehow.
It would lift its black lips & show them
The reddened gums, the long rows of incisors,
Teeth that went all the way back beyond
The flames of Troy & Carthage, beyond sheep
Grazing rock-strewn hills, fragments of ruins
In the grass at San Vitale. It would back away
Delicately & smoothly, stepping carefully
In twenty seconds. Mangle it for good. It could
Sever it completely from the wrist in forty.
There was nothing to be done for it. Someone
Or other probably called the LAPD, who then
Called Animal Control, who woke a driver, who
Then dressed in mailed gloves, the kind of thing
Small knights once wore into battle, who gathered
Together his pole with a noose on the end,
A light steel net to snare it with, someone who hoped
The thing would have vanished by the time he got there.
It had been empty a day.
It suddenly seemed so costly
and uncalled for anyway.
Two years had passed. They had passed
more or less the way years should.
the doctors had misunderstood.
It was June. The enormous elm tree
was green again, and the scent
and followed wherever he went.
And the sky was the firmament!
His life was never better.
Each small white spotless cloud that passed
was like a long-wished-for letter.
But then he remembered his promise.
It came like a mild cramp,
like a gas bill awaiting a stamp.
He saw three faces that Sunday,
mother, sister, niece,
all with the same kind, brown, scared eyes
that brought him no peace.
The sidewalk sparrows were peeping.
His whole house smelled like a flower.
But he remembered his promise.
The drugstore said one hour.
Back home again, he was tired.
The label said caution, said warning.
He left the clear orange bottle
The insert said warning, said caution.
The insert said constipation.
It said insomnia, vivid dreams,
and hypersalivation,
It also said night sweats, and
agranulocytosis,
be drunk with all doses.
The insert said all this,
the insert he never read.
to know what it said.
The bedroom was calm with moonlight
and the breeze through the screen was cooling.
Through the elm leaves the shivery light on the wall
came like quicksilver pooling.
and the bedroom was queasy with light the color
He lay there listening hard
At nine he remembered the bottle.
But nine, nine was too late. 
By ten he was feeling restless,
with a whole day left to kill.
And the bright yellow morning seemed suddenly edged
with a shady fascination. 
Why should he go to his workplace?
Who was his supervisor?
He had a sickening feeling
that he was becoming wiser.
His room filled up with interest.
He had begun to think!
He thought of the knives in the kitchen
and the bottles under the sink.
He thought as he switched the stove on
or stood at his shaving mirror,
or reached for his belt in the wardrobe. 
Thinking made things clearer. 
Even the bedroom window,
the open window full of sun,
continually hinted
at something that should be done.
But he was crooked and useless.
 And so, as everyone knew he would,
 he failed to go through with it.
 Just then, the telephone rang.
 Just then, he ripped out the plug.
 and the cellar door lilted and murmured,
 and the garden gate groaned and yawned
 and let a little noise in.
 There, just outside his window,
 lurked life like a cheap cartoon.
 He shut the sash, locked it, and checked it,
 and checked it all afternoon.
 He lowered the blinds on that world,
 but then, with one finger, pulled down a slat
 and set his eye above it.
At first it was grimly amusing,
at last it was grimly grim,
to watch all those hunched, hurried people,
The neighbors were thinking out loud.
So he slumped on a stool in the corner
like a bad little snaggletooth should.
They called him a dirty pig, and laughed,
Sometimes they made a tsking sound,
or oinked at him, or hissed.
They hissed that he was to blame
for everything, and everyone knew it,
He lay on his side on the rug
 unable to move at all
except for his big right toe,
And they begged him to sew his mouth shut
just to make goddamn sure.
And the gate to the wicked city gaped,
and the gates of the temple screamed and screamed,
and the gates of the garden groaned and yawned,
and the gates of the ziggurat gabbled in grief,
 His thoughts were advancing like wolves.
He lay still for an hour and a half,
then reared up onto his rickety legs
like a newborn calf.
porch 
and the blacktop humanly warm
His walk was stiffened by fear, 
but it took him where he was going,
into the terrible world 
of children and daffodils growing,
that an odious axis was forming,
that it would not be controlled,
that schemes were afoot, that a foot
hate the people of this village  
and would nail our hats 
to our heads for refusing in their presence to remove them 
or staple our hands to our foreheads  
for refusing to salute them 
if we did not hurt them first: mail them packages of rats, 
mix their flour at night with broken glass. 
We do this, they do that. 
We devein one of their sisters. 
The quicksand pits they built were good. 
Our amputation teams were better. 
We trained some birds to steal their wheat. 
They sent to us exploding ambassadors of peace. 
They do this, we do that. 
We canceled our sheep imports.  
They no longer bought our blankets.  
We mocked their greatest poet  
and when that had no effect  
we parodied the way they dance 
which did cause pain, so they, in turn, said our God 
was leprous, hairless. 
We do this, they do that. 
Ten thousand (10,000) years, ten thousand 
(10,000) brutal, beautiful years.
i.110  
"Much too long" you say, Velox, censorious, 
You write none. Your brevity is glorious. 

Scribere me quereris, Velox, epigrammata longa. 
     ipse nihil scribis: tu breviora facis? 
vi.60  
For my small books Rome's gone utterly mad; 
First he blushes deeply, then he's furious; 
A moment later his eyes glaze over; 
He yawns, flips a page, then reels in horror. 
This mercurial response I thrill to see; 
Why, then my epigrams even please me! 

Laudat, amat, cantat nostros mea Roma libellos, 
ecce rubet quidam, pallet, stupet, oscitat, odit. 
     hoc volo: nunc nobis carmina nostra placent. 
vii.90  
Matho's one-word review of my small book: 
"Uneven." I'm supposed to get all shook! 
The scribblings of Calvinus and Umber 
Are very "even". . . yet how they lumber. 
I swear to you, Creticus, I thank God 
My gift is for being quite frankly "odd."

Iactat inaequalem Matho me fecisse libellum:
     si verum est, laudat carmina nostra Matho. 
aequales scribit libros Calvinus et Umber: 
     aequalis liber est, Cretice, qui malus est. 
ix.50  
You pontificate my talent is small, 
Gaurus, because my epigrams are all 
Just puny trifles. Yet they seem to please, 
I'll confess. They're a veritable breeze 
Compared to your epic tome, which rattles, 
In twelve mortal books, o'er Priam's battles. 
That makes you big man on campus? Oh no! 
As statuettes of master carvers glow 
With life, so do my tiny dramas boast 
Vital creatures. Your giants? Clay, at most. 

Ingenium mihi, Gaure, probas sic esse pusillum, 
     carmina quod faciam quae brevitate placent. 
confiteor. sed tu bis senis grandia libris 
     qui scribis Priami proelia, magnus homo es? 
nos facimus Bruti puerum, nos Langona vivum:
     tu magnus luteum, Gaure, Giganta facis. 
iv.49  
Quite clueless, Flaccus, all these sorry folks 
Who brand short poems mere badinage and jokes. 
Want to know who's more idle? The big boys, 
Our Epic Poets, who rehearse the joys 
Tereus' bloody banquet or the huge tart 
Chez Thyestes ("It's a little gristly!"). 
Or they serve us crap, like how remissly 
For his poor doomed son. Then Big Epic sings 
Polyphemus: his brain was far from pliant, 
So Homer made him watch sheep in Sicily. 
Flaccus, at insults to my epigrams, 
So far from the bloated whimsy that crams 
Our big-assed epics. All men blare in praise 
of these "classics," you say, and bask in their rays. 
I will not disagree, but mark my word: 
Some day, far off, a wise man will be heard 
To say, "Classics we all want to have read, 
Never to read." My books get read instead! 

Nescit, crede mihi, quid sint epigrammata, Flacce, 
     qui tantum lusus illa iocosque vocat. 
ille magis ludit qui scribit prandia saevi 
     Tereos aut cenam, crude Thyesta, tuam, 
aut puero liquidas aptantem Daedalon alas, 
     pascentem Siculas aut Polyphemon ovis. 
a nostris procul est omnis vesica libellis, 
     Musa nec insano syrmate nostra tumet. 
"illa tamen laudant omnes, mirantur, adorant."
     confiteor: laudant illa, sed ista legunt. 
ix.81 
Read or recited, my verse is much praised, 
Aulus, yet one poet opines: "Ill-phrased."
I couldn't care less! When I set a table, 
My guests, not the cooks, should say I'm able. 

Lector et auditor nostros probat, Aule, libellos, 
     sed quidam exactos esse poeta negat. 
non nimium curo: nam cenae fercula nostrae 
     malim convivis quam placuisse cocis. 
x.59  
If a poem's too long you move swiftly on; 
"Shorter the better!" is your golden rule. 
But markets are scoured to make the tongue drool; 
But I don't hunger for diners so prude: 

Consumpta est uno si lemmate pagina, transis, 
     et breviora tibi, non meliora placent. 
dives et ex omni posita est instructa macello 
     cena tibi, sed te mattea sola iuvat. 
non opus est nobis nimium lectore guloso; 
     hunc volo, non fiat qui sine pane satur. 
xi.16  
You there, reader, the over-solemn one, 
Only for blithe, witty cognoscenti 
"Up" for priapic jeux de spree aplenty 
Or aroused by bells on harlot's fingers. 
Though more stern than Curius or Fabricius 
Soon gets tingly, and anon lubricious; 
Then, lo, beneath a toga something pokes. 
My little book's salacious whims and jokes 
Will lead even the chastest dames astray; 
Taken with wine, my lines can make 'em bray! 
Lucretia, more proper than whom none such, 
Peeked between my covers, blushed very much, 
And threw me down (but Brutus stood glowering). 

Qui gravis es nimium, potes hinc iam, lector, abire 
     quo libet: urbanae scripsimus ista togae; 
iam mea Lampsacio lascivit pagina versu 
     et Tartesiaca concrepat aera manu. 
o quotiens rigida pulsabis pallia vena, 
     sis gravior Curio Fabricioque licet! 
tu quoque nequitias nostri lususque libelli 
     uda, puella, leges, sis Patavina licet. 
erubuit posuitque meum Lucretia librum, 
     sed coram Bruto; Brute, recede: leget. 
iv.89 
Hey, you're stuffed, little book, give it a rest. 
You've reached the end-papers and still have zest! 
What on earth makes you yet want to let go, 
When "misfire" our verse reeked from the get-go? 
Zip it, my pages, let's call a "time out"; 
Even our publisher calls you a pest: 
"Hey, you're stuffed, little book, give it a rest!"

Ohe, iam satis, ohe, libelle, 
iam pervenimus usque ad umbilicos. 
tu procedere adhuc et ire quaeris, 
nec summa potes in schida teneri, 
sic tamquam tibi res peracta non sit, 
quae prima quoque pagina peracta est. 
iam lector queriturque deficitque, 
iam librarius hoc et ipse dicit 
"ohe, iam satis est, ohe, libelle."
I
The ground dove stuttered for a few steps then flew
up from his path to settle in the sun-browned
branches that were now barely twigs; in drought it coos
with its relentless valve, a tiring sound,
not like the sweet exchanges of turtles in the Song
of Solomon, or the flutes of Venus in frescoes
though all the mounds in the dove-calling drought
the hills and gulches all briary and ochre
and the small dervishes that swivelled in the dust
were like an umber study for a fresco
of The Prodigal Son, this scorched, barren acre.
He had the smell of cities in his clothes,
the steam and soot of trains of Fascist stations
and their resounding vaults, he had the memory of rain
carried in his head, the rain on Pescara's beach
with the pastel hotels, and instead of the doves
the air-show with the jets soaring and swooping
over the Fair, the smell off that beach
came back on the rock-road where the turtle lifted
its mating music into the dry acacias,
and mixed with the smell off the galloping sea-flock,
each odour distinct, of sheep trampling their pens
as if their fear had caught the wolf-scent.
The rock-brown dove had fluttered from that fear
would panic and forget him from the change
of character that the grunting swine could smell.
A sow and her litter. Acknowledged prodigal.
Grey sunrise through a sky of frosted glass,
the great trees sodden, the paths below them pooled,
the headlands veiled and muslin-thin, no birds,
and pale green combers cresting through the drizzle;
a change of climate, the clouding of the self
in a sudden culture but one more confident
in its glazed equestrian statues in wet parks,
its railway stations echoing like the combers
in the ground-shaken caves under the cliff;
gathering, cresting then dissolving shallows
as light steps quietly into the house.
Light that inaudibly fits in the house
as a book on a bookshelf with its spines of tombs
and names, mouths slightly parted, eager to speak
wherever their station now. Every library
is a cemetery in sunlight. Sometimes, a shaft . . .
Across the dry hillock, leaves chasing dead leaves
in resurrecting gusts, or in the ochre quiet
leaves too many to rake on the road's margins,
too loaded to lift themselves, they lapsed singly
or in a yellow chute from the cedar, burnt branches;
lyres of desiccation choked the dry gutters
by the caked track to Saltibus, over D'ennery.
Drought. Song of the wireless harp of the frangipani
that still makes a tangled music out of silence.
II
Now to cherish the depredations of April
the gommier maudit unshouldering its leaves,
barrow after loaded barrow, the leaves fading, yellow,
burnt grass and the tigerish shadows on the hillside,
and the azure a trowelled blue, and blue hill-smoke,
parched shortcuts and rust, cattle anchored in shadows
and groaning like winches, the didactic drought
against the hot sea that teaches what? Thirst
for the grace that springs in grooves of oblivious dust.
A fine haze screens the headland, the drizzle drifts.
Is every noun: breakwater, headland, haze,
seen through a gauze of English, a bright scrim,
a mesh in which light now defines the wires
and not its natural language? Were your life and work
simply a good translation? Would headland,
haze and the spray-wracked breakwater
pronounce their own names differently?
And have I looked at life, in other words,
through some inoperable cataract?
"What language do you speak in your own country?"
Every noun has its echo, a noun is a noise,
as every stone in the expanding sunlight
finds an exact translation in its shadow,
and it may be that you were halved by language
of Greenwich or by Pope Alexander's line,
but what makes this, if this is all it is,
more than just bearable, in fact, exultation
is the stone that is looked at, and the manchineels,
bitter, poisonous yellow berries, treacherous apples
that look like Eden's on the tree of knowledge
when the first noun was picked and named and eaten
and the shadow of knowledge defined every edge
originating language and then difference,
and subtlety, the snake and contradiction
and the sudden Babel of the manchineel.
III
The blank page grows a visionary wood.
A parallel section, no, in fact a whole province
of far, of foreign, of self-translating leaves
stands on the place where it has always stood
the right-hand margin of the page
loud, soft but voluble in their original language,
going far back in time and deep in roots
and echoing in the tunnel of the right ear
with echoes: oak-echo, beech-echo, linden-echo,
and beech and birds a half-ancestral forest
whose metre was an ocean's and whose break,
parting declared the white-lined conjugation
of combers' centuries. This ocean, English and this forest weald,
this clattering natterer "burn," this distance, mist,
kept its high columns marching as my pen moves
towards that gap of light that comes upon
the bright salt arc of a bare unprinted beach
or where the piper leaves a print, its claws,
that is the landscape, that, the stand of forest
made up of all these leaves and lines that
still rasp with delight with rhyme and incantation
pages of shade turning into translation.
And my left hand another vegetation
but not their opposite or their enemy,
palms and wild fern and praising them, the sea,
sea-almond, grape and vine and agave
that the wind's finger folded carefully
drawing its thumb to mark the dog-eared wave
across the dry hill, leaves chasing leaves
in a shiny, scurrying wind, and, in the brown quiet,
leaves, unraked, tiling the road's margins,
so loaded they don't lift, they lapse singly, yellow,
or chute from the cedars. Lyres of desiccation
in March's autumn, filling the dry gutters,
except for the wireless harp of the frangipani
that still makes its music out of extreme stillness.
In my own botanic origins, frangere panem
to break bread, flower-flour in its white lilies,
except that in rare blossom I now remember
the flower is pink. It doesn't matter.
Since whatever hue it is, its wafer it serves that need,
petal on the sky's open palate at early mass
every morning but here most on this Sunday
with its Lenten drought, the heart-coloured flowers then
the caterpillars determinedly devour,
on a Sunday when a sadness still eats at the parallel
petals of my beaten heart, and the white pews of the sea,
the waves coming in aisles, my longing
for the communion of breakfast, the leafless,
flower-less but crusted bark of the frangipani,
frangere panem, the pain that I break and eat
flower and flour, pain and pain,
bright Easter coming, like the seas white communion.
IV
In the country of the ochre afternoon
it is always still and hot, the dry leaves stirring
infrequently sometimes with the rattling pods
of what they call "women's tongues," in
the afternoon country the far hills are very quiet
and heat-hazed, but mostly in the middle
of the country of the afternoon I see the brown heat
of the skin of my first love, so still, so perfect,
so unaltered, and I see how she walked
with her sunburnt hands against the still sea-almonds,
that was when I thought we were immortal
and that love would be folded doves and folded oars
and water lapping against eroding stone
in the ochre country of the afternoon.
I
The dialect of the scrub in the dry season
withers the flow of English. Things burn for days
without translation, with the heat
of the scorched pastures and their skeletal cows.
Every noun is a stump with its roots showing,
and the creole language rushes like weeds
until the entire island is overrun,
then the rain begins to come in paragraphs
and hazes this page, hazes the grey of islets,
the grey of eyes, the rainstorm's wild-haired beauty.
The first daybreak of rain, the crusted drought
broken in half like bread, the quiet trumpet mouth
of a rainbow and the wiry drizzle fighting
decease, half the year blowing out to sea
in hale, refreshing gusts, the withered lilies
drink with grateful mouths, and the first blackbird
of the new season announces itself on a bough
the hummingbird is reglistened drilling
the pierced hedges, my small shaft to your heart,
my emerald arrow: A crowd crosses a bridge
from Canaries to the Ponte Vecchio, from
Piaille to Pescara, and a volley of blackbirds
fans over Venice or the broken pier of Choiseul,
and love is as wide as the span of my open palm
for frontiers that read like one country,
one map of affection that closes around my pen.
I had forgotten the benediction of rain
edged with sunlight, the prayers of dripping leaves
and the cat testing the edge of the season
with careful paw. And I have nothing more
to write about than gratitude. For la mer,
and the archery of blackbirds from its
radiant bow. The rest of the year is rain.
II
There was a beautiful rain this morning."
"I was asleep."
She smiled at him, then laughed as she kept yawning.
"It was lovely rain." But I thought of the dead
I know. The sun shone through the rain
and it was lovely.
There were so many names the rain recited:
Alan, Joseph and Claude and Charles and Roddy.
The sunlight came through the rain and the drizzle shone
as it had done before for everybody.
For John and Inge, Devindra and Hamilton.
"Blessed are the dead that the rain rains upon,"
wrote Edward Thomas. Her eyes closed in my arms,
but it was sleep. She was asleep again,
while the bright rain moved from Massade to Monchy.
Sometimes I stretch out, or you stretch out your hand,
and we lock palms; our criss-crossed histories join
and two maps fit. Bays, boundaries, rivers, roads,
one country, one warm island. Is that noise rain
on the hot roof, is it sweeping out to sea
by the stones and shells of the almond cemetery?
III
The road is wet, the leaves wet, but the sun inching,
and always the astonishment: in March?
This blustery, this grey? The waves chopping
and circling and ramming into one another
like sheep in a maddened pen from a whiff of wolf,
or white mares, bug-eyed from the lightning's whip,
and, if they could, whinnying. But the light will win.
The sun fought with the rain in the leaves and won;
then the rain came back and it was finer out to sea.
A drizzle blurred the promontories evenly
and now the manchineels and acacias sparkled
with the new rain and the cows' hides darkened
as the horses dipped their heads and shook their manes,
and over the horizon the faint arc
of an almost imperceptible bow appeared
then dimmed across the channel towards Martinique.
This miracle was usual for the season.
"The sun came out just for you," he said.
And it was true. The light entered her forehead
and blazoned her difference there.
The pastures were beaded, roofs shone on the hills,
a sloop was working its way against huge clouds
as patches of sunlight widened with a new zeal
towards detachment, towards simplicity.
Who said that they were lying side by side,
the cupped spoon of her torso in his own
in the striped shadows of mid-afternoon?
IV
The doors are open, the house breathes and I feel
a balm so heavy and a benediction
so weightless that the past is just blue air
and cobalt motion lanced with emerald
and sail-flecks and the dove's continuous complaint
about repletion, its swollen note of gratitude-
all incantation is the monody of thanks
to the sky's motionless or moving altars,
even to the faint drone of that silver insect
that is the morning plane over Martinique,
while, take this for what you will, the frangipani
that, for dry months, contorted, crucified
in impotence or barrenness, endured, has come
with pale pink petals and blades of olive leaves,
parable of my loin-longing, my silver age.
From the salt brightness of my balcony
I look across to the abandoned fort;
no History left, just natural history,
as a cloud's shadow subtilizes thought.
On a sloped meadow lifted by the light,
the Hessians spun like blossoms from the immortelle,
the tattered pennons of the sea-almond fluttered
to the spray-white detonations of the lilac
against blue the hue of a grenadier, dried pods
of the flamboyant rattle their sabres
and a mare's whinny across the parched pastures
launches white scuds of sails across the channel,
A grey sky trawls its silver wires of rain;
these are the subtleties of the noon sea:
lime, emerald, lilac, cobalt, ultramarine.
I
From a blue keg, the barrel's thumb-tuned goatskin,
the choirs of ancestral ululation
are psalms and pivot for the prodigal
in a dirt yard at Piaille, are confrontation,
old incantation and fresh sacrifice
where a ram is tethered, without the scrolled horns,
wool locks and beard of the scapegoat,
in the Old Testament, or black blood gushing in a trench
in Attic ceremony and rite. Death softens the eyes
of the still, unbleating sheep, a common ewe,
as for you this is common. There is no awe
in repetition, no claim, no tribal ecstasy,
no pardon in the bent smoke from Guinea,
the sprinkled white rum, or the meal crumbled
on the small stone altar, in the broken memory
of the slaver's coast and the braided villages
of thatch and coalpot from the salted passage
to this paralysis where your pale feet cannot keep time
feel no communion with its celebrants,
they keep another time, the time you keep
comes with a different metre, your skin
what sheath and prison that it has become
as a dried chrysalis with no ressurection
and one unwished for. Star-embers fade.
II
I could give facts and dates, but to what use?
In the lush chasms and fissures of Choiseul
an ogre bred my grandam, whelped my father,
erected my tall aunts; slopes with potato vines,
and the narrow, clean dark water of River Doree,
the fragrant hogplums and chapel of La Fargue;
go in search of his own shire, unlatch a gate
that opens into Albion, its faery flowers,
its source of intellectual bastardy,
without embarrassment or degradation,
without belligerence or accusation,
and mostly selfishly, without self-contempt,
a curious and self-nourishing integer
outside their given numbers and their dates,
as nameless as the bush, beyond heredity
or prophecy, or the quiet panic of clocks,
the shallow penitence of mirrors. Mongrel.
And out of this chord, this discord will come
the Atlantic's drone, the Caribbean hum
of chaos in an ochre afternoon
the enclosing harmony that we call home
when the sea mints its quicksilver, when
the cedars sag and the light ends up with nothing.
The facts! The Facts! The history. The cause.
You need a history to make your case.
III
1492. 1833. 1930.
Dates. The one thing about which there is no discourse.
Dates multiplied by events, by consequences,
are what add up to History. We have a few coins
struck for a mere handful of events,
as amateur numismatists, regal profiles,
none worthy in the traditional way of memory
slavery being an infinity of endeavour
without pause or payment, without commemoration,
only the long division of day into dark,
of drought into rainburst, equinoxes glide
over their own shadows, and all our dates,
our calendars, hymns and anniversaries,
were bequeathed to us. Left to itself
the brain would be mantled like coral in the cool
shade of a reefs outcrop and turret, swayed
like reeds in meditation, dateless.
here comes the quiet lily crescent of the moon.
IV
From this thick tree issues miraculous bread.
The breadfruit makes itself from copious shade,
whose dial is the ground's dry, palmate leaves,
a voluble, invaluable dome, a library,
where all the town's talk is stored,
a rising sea in wind, the spinning pages
of remorseful texts, Bligh's log and cannonballs
and so magnanimous in circumference
that it has no time without shade, and shade
is suffering. The sun makes their suffering mute.
This bedraggled backyard, this unfulfilled lot,
this little field of leaves, brittle and fallen,
of all the cities of the world, this is your centre.
O to be luminous and exact! As this tree is
in ripening sunshine, that your own leaves could shine
with nourishment, and give such shade and peace,
the mirror of each canvas that you sign.
Despite acclamation, despite contempt,
I was never part of that catalogue
in spite of friends in the same business
the clogged, elegiac thickness of memory;
farther away from all that, forever,
knee-high in the foam of the page
wading by sounding caves.
Gradually it hardens, the death-mask of Fame.
V
And Sancta Trinidad. It is that sacred to me.
However fragmentary, through a sunlit hedge,
by the running of clear water over the sun-wiry stones
and a cool hoarding of bamboos without a bridge
phrases of Spain in summer, in the vale of Santa Cruz,
arch, sounding sweet, surreptitious, twittering leaves
and shadows moving over indigo mountains.
In a green street of hedges and vermilion roofs,
and gates that creak open into banana yards
and doors that groan on the evocation of ginger
behind which are the hill with five cresting palms
whose long fingers are stirring tropical almanacs
darkened with rain over the grey savannahs
of zebu and bison and the small chalk temples
of an almost erased Asia, and the ovations of cane
through which turbaned horsemen carry feathering lances.
The cloud-white egret, the heron whose hue
is wet slate, move through a somnolence
as sweet as malaria to a child whose parched lips
are soothed by a servant or his own mother,
to the sudden great sound of rain on the roofs,
cloudburst of benediction, dry seas in his ears.
Go, for they call you, shepherd, from the hill;
Go, shepherd, and untie the wattled cotes!
     No longer leave thy wistful flock unfed,
Nor let thy bawling fellows rack their throats,
     Nor the cropp'd herbage shoot another head.
          But when the fields are still,
And the tired men and dogs all gone to rest,
     And only the white sheep are sometimes seen
     Cross and recross the strips of moon-blanch'd green.
Come, shepherd, and again begin the quest!
In this high field's dark corner, where he leaves
     His coat, his basket, and his earthen cruse,
And in the sun all morning binds the sheaves,
          Here will I sit and wait,
While to my ear from uplands far away
     The bleating of the folded flocks is borne,
All the live murmur of a summer's day.
Screen'd is this nook o'er the high, half-reap'd field,
And here till sun-down, shepherd! will I be.
     Through the thick corn the scarlet poppies peep,
And round green roots and yellowing stalks I see
     Pale pink convolvulus in tendrils creep;
          And air-swept lindens yield
Their scent, and rustle down their perfumed showers
     Of bloom on the bent grass where I am laid,
     And bower me from the August sun with shade;
And the eye travels down to Oxford's towers.
Come, let me read the oft-read tale again!
     The story of the Oxford scholar poor,
Of pregnant parts and quick inventive brain,
     Who, tired of knocking at preferment's door,
          One summer-morn forsook
His friends, and went to learn the gipsy-lore,
     And roam'd the world with that wild brotherhood,
     And came, as most men deem'd, to little good,
But came to Oxford and his friends no more.
But once, years after, in the country-lanes,
Two scholars, whom at college erst he knew,
     Met him, and of his way of life enquired;
Whereat he answer'd, that the gipsy-crew,
     His mates, had arts to rule as they desired
          The workings of men's brains,
And they can bind them to what thoughts they will.
     "And I," he said, "the secret of their art,
     When fully learn'd, will to the world impart;
But it needs heaven-sent moments for this skill."
But rumours hung about the country-side,
     That the lost Scholar long was seen to stray,
Seen by rare glimpses, pensive and tongue-tied,
     In hat of antique shape, and cloak of grey,
          The same the gipsies wore.
Shepherds had met him on the Hurst in spring;
     At some lone alehouse in the Berkshire moors,
     On the warm ingle-bench, the smock-frock'd boors
Had found him seated at their entering,
But, 'mid their drink and clatter, he would fly.
And I myself seem half to know thy looks,
     And put the shepherds, wanderer! on thy trace;
And boys who in lone wheatfields scare the rooks
     I ask if thou hast pass'd their quiet place;
          Or in my boat I lie
Moor'd to the cool bank in the summer-heats,
     'Mid wide grass meadows which the sunshine fills,
And wonder if thou haunt'st their shy retreats.
For most, I know, thou lov'st retired ground!
Thee at the ferry Oxford riders blithe,
     Returning home on summer-nights, have met
  Crossing the stripling Thames at Bab-lock-hithe,
     Trailing in the cool stream thy fingers wet,
          As the punt's rope chops round;
And leaning backward in a pensive dream,
     And fostering in thy lap a heap of flowers
     Pluck'd in shy fields and distant Wychwood bowers,
And thine eyes resting on the moonlit stream.
Maidens, who from the distant hamlets come
     To dance around the Fyfield elm in May,
Oft through the darkening fields have seen thee roam,
     Or cross a stile into the public way.
          Oft thou hast given them store
     Dark bluebells drench'd with dews of summer eves,
But none hath words she can report of thee.
And, above Godstow Bridge, when hay-time's here
In June, and many a scythe in sunshine flames,
     Men who through those wide fields of breezy grass
Where black-wing'd swallows haunt the glittering Thames,
     To bathe in the abandon'd lasher pass,
          Have often pass'd thee near
Sitting upon the river bank o'ergrown;
     Mark'd thine outlandish garb, thy figure spare,
But, when they came from bathing, thou wast gone!
At some lone homestead in the Cumner hills,
Where at her open door the housewife darns,
     Thou hast been seen, or hanging on a gate
To watch the threshers in the mossy barns.
     Children, who early range these slopes and late
          For cresses from the rills,
Have known thee eyeing, all an April-day,
     The springing pasture and the feeding kine;
     And mark'd thee, when the stars come out and shine,
Through the long dewy grass move slow away.
Where most the gipsies by the turf-edged way
     Pitch their smoked tents, and every bush you see
With scarlet patches tagg'd and shreds of grey,
          The blackbird, picking food,
Sees thee, nor stops his meal, nor fears at all;
     So often has he known thee past him stray,
     Rapt, twirling in thy hand a wither'd spray,
And waiting for the spark from heaven to fall.
And once, in winter, on the causeway chill
Where home through flooded fields foot-travellers go,
     Have I not pass'd thee on the wooden bridge,
Wrapt in thy cloak and battling with the snow,
     Thy face tow'rd Hinksey and its wintry ridge?
          And thou has climb'd the hill,
And gain'd the white brow of the Cumner range;
     Turn'd once to watch, while thick the snowflakes fall,
Then sought thy straw in some sequester'd grange.
Since first thy story ran through Oxford halls,
     And the grave Glanvil did the tale inscribe
That thou wert wander'd from the studious walls
     To learn strange arts, and join a gipsy-tribe;
          And thou from earth art gone
     Some country-nook, where o'er thy unknown grave
     Tall grasses and white flowering nettles wave,
Under a dark, red-fruited yew-tree's shade.
For what wears out the life of mortal men?
     'Tis that from change to change their being rolls;
'Tis that repeated shocks, again, again,
     Exhaust the energy of strongest souls
          And numb the elastic powers.
Till having used our nerves with bliss and teen,
     And tired upon a thousand schemes our wit,
     To the just-pausing Genius we remit
Thou hast not lived, why should'st thou perish, so?
Thou hadst one aim, one business, one desire;
     Else wert thou long since number'd with the dead!
Else hadst thou spent, like other men, thy fire!
     The generations of thy peers are fled,
          And we ourselves shall go;
But thou possessest an immortal lot,
     And we imagine thee exempt from age
     And living as thou liv'st on Glanvil's page,
For early didst thou leave the world, with powers
Fresh, undiverted to the world without,
     Firm to their mark, not spent on other things;
Free from the sick fatigue, the languid doubt,
     Which much to have tried, in much been baffled, brings.
          O life unlike to ours!
Who fluctuate idly without term or scope,
     Of whom each strives, nor knows for what he strives,
     And each half lives a hundred different lives;
Who wait like thee, but not, like thee, in hope.
Thou waitest for the spark from heaven! and we,
Light half-believers of our casual creeds,
     Who never deeply felt, nor clearly will'd,
Whose insight never has borne fruit in deeds,
     Whose vague resolves never have been fulfill'd;
          For whom each year we see
Breeds new beginnings, disappointments new;
     Who hesitate and falter life away,
Ah! do not we, wanderer! await it too?
And then we suffer! and amongst us one,
     Who most has suffer'd, takes dejectedly
His seat upon the intellectual throne;
     And all his store of sad experience he
          Lays bare of wretched days;
Tells us his misery's birth and growth and signs,
     And how the dying spark of hope was fed,
     And how the breast was soothed, and how the head,
And all his hourly varied anodynes.
This for our wisest! and we others pine,
And wish the long unhappy dream would end,
     And waive all claim to bliss, and try to bear;
With close-lipp'd patience for our only friend,
          But none has hope like thine!
Thou through the fields and through the woods dost stray,
     Roaming the country-side, a truant boy,
     Nursing thy project in unclouded joy,
And every doubt long blown by time away.
O born in days when wits were fresh and clear,
And life ran gaily as the sparkling Thames;
     Before this strange disease of modern life,
With its sick hurry, its divided aims,
          Fly hence, our contact fear!
Still fly, plunge deeper in the bowering wood!
     Averse, as Dido did with gesture stern
     From her false friend's approach in Hades turn,
Wave us away, and keep thy solitude!
Still nursing the unconquerable hope,
Still clutching the inviolable shade,
     With a free, onward impulse brushing through,
     Far on the forest-skirts, where none pursue,
          On some mild pastoral slope
Emerge, and resting on the moonlit pales
     Freshen thy flowers as in former years
     With dew, or listen with enchanted ears,
From the dark tingles, to the nightingales!
But fly our paths, our feverish contact fly!
For strong the infection of our mental strife,
     Which, though it gives no bliss, yet spoils for rest;
And we should win thee from thy own fair life,
     Like us distracted, and like us unblest.
          Soon, soon thy cheer would die,
Thy hopes grow timorous, and unfix'd thy powers,
     And thy clear aims be cross and shifting made;
     And then thy glad perennial youth would fade,
Fade and grow old at last, and die like ours.
Then fly our greetings, fly our speech and smiles!
     Descried at sunrise an emerging prow
Lifting the cool-hair'd creepers stealthily,
     The fringes of a southward-facing brow
And saw the merry Grecian coaster come,
     Freighted with amber grapes, and Chian wine,
And knew the intruders on his ancient home,
And snatch'd his rudder, and shook out more sail;
     And day and night held on indignantly
O'er the blue Midland waters with the gale,
     Betwixt the Syrtes and soft Sicily,
          To where the Atlantic raves
Outside the western straits; and unbent sails
     There, where down cloudy cliffs, through sheets of foam,
     Shy traffickers, the dark Iberians come;
And on the beach undid his corded bales.

Achilles slays the man who slayed his friend, pierces the corpse
behind the heels and drags it
behind his chariot like the cans that trail
a bride and groom. Then he lays out
a banquet for his men, oxen and goats
and pigs and sheep; the soldiers eat
until a greasy moonbeam lights their beards.
in the morning more animals must be killed
for burning with the body of the friend. But Achilles finds
no consolation in the hiss and crackle of their fat;
not even heaving four stallions on the pyre
can lift the ballast of his sorrow.
killing what the loved one loved
to reverse the polarity of grief. Let him repent
by vanishing from my concern
after he throws the dogs onto the fire.
The singed fur makes the air too difficult to breathe.
When the oil wells of Persia burned I did not weep
until I heard about the birds, the long-legged ones especially
which I imagined to be scarlet, with crests like egrets
weighting the feathers they dragged through black shallows 
at the rim of the marsh. But once
I told this to a man who said I was inhuman, for giving animals
my first lament. So now I guard 
my inhumanity like the jackal
who appears behind the army base at dusk,
come there for scraps with his head lowered
in a posture that looks like appeasement,
though it is not.
They have left behind the established cave 
with its well-worn floor. Scholarship impels them 
in hundreds, but generally one by one, 
to find an unknown passage or scrape out their own. 
Proto-Semitic linguistic theory, 
Hittite stratigraphic anomalies, 
microclimatic economics. "What do you see?" 
invisible followers ask in their ears, 
and they whisper "Wonderful things" as they quarry 
a grain of rock at a time, or examine 
a fleck of ore, or measure 
the acidity of a trickle of water. 
See! Behold! Look! Lo! 
they cry in season, rapt, in love, 
chipping away with their pocketknives, 
pencils, rulers, fingernails, 
but some have tunneled so narrowly and deep 
that those behind see nothing but slivers of light 
around an excavator's haunches. 
A battered piece of a tablet is all that remains 
of the so-called Singer of Nab. 
Circa 1200 BCE, 
he impressed, or had impressed, some words in clay. 
He may have composed a religious hymn, 
praise to the king, a poem of love, 
an inventory of cattle. (He may have been she, 
but this is unlikely.) The lines we have 
could be the beginning or the middle; 
there may have been ten more, or hundreds. 
The word before this gap, in fact, means "hundreds." 
Hundreds led in battle, hundreds slain? 
A thousand times beloved, nine hundred sheep? 
And the standard translation of this word, here, 
is either "desire" or "need." But did he write 
of a boundless yearning, or mercantile requirements? 
Was he a "singer"? The scholars who care disagree. 
Look at them, crouched in a long tunnel dug 
by means of argument over an antique syntax, 
warming their hands at a chunk of brick 
baked maybe in the time of the Trojan War, 
peering at it with penlights, squandering eyesight. 
They know they may crawl out hungry, mumbling, 
aged and gray, clutching a secret message of small import 
or nothing, nothing. They seem lost. They seem happy.
Facing the wind of the avenues
one spring evening in New York,
I wore under my thin jacket
a sweater given me by the wife
of a genial Manchurian.
The warmth in that sweater changed
the indifferent city block by block.
The buildings were mountains
that fled as I approached them.
The traffic became sheep and cattle
milling in muddy pastures.
I could feel around me the large
movements of men and horses.
It was spring in Siberia or Mongolia,
wherever I happened to be.
Rough but honest voices called to me
out of that solitude:
they told me we are all tired
of this coiling weight,
the oppression of a long winter;
that it was time to renew our life,
burn the expired contracts,
elect new governments.
The old Imperial sun has set,
and I must write a poem to the Emperor.
I shall speak it like the man
I should be, an inhabitant of the frontier,
clad in sweat-darkened wool,
my face stained by wind and smoke.
Surely the Emperor and his court
will want to know what a fine
and generous revolution begins tomorrow
in one of his remote provinces...

The rain comes late, draws the afternoon into darkness, 
no light where there should be light, no way to be but drenched 
until it curves down over your lips. The taste of every living thing 
is in the raindrop the way all things open their eyes inside 
a single bloom in the garden that is now hushed in a robe. 
Whatever you feel about it, whether you live for it or pray 
for the rains to die, the water joins with all of us, tendon, bone, 
artery, vein, saliva, everything that melts and goes hard, escapes 
as air. The water brings a reunion for a moment with what we know 
each time we breathe ourselves here or are forced to breathe. 
If I write without color it is to obey the gray way rain brings 
the past to us. The ten thousand are one giant palace with a room 
for remembering, where you must stand alone, touch and believe 
while it seems you are touching nothing and have gone all mad 
in this life, this gift. We are sitting on a rock in the thick falling 
of water, purple lilies are growing in the sun's ocean shadow, 
sheep with golden wool are flying in the trees, a patient monkey 
is bandaging a wounded blade of grass, the garden is a mesa, 
seeds are mountain caves, the moon has gone infinite, made 
two of its own selves for each of our palms. Now we have faces.
The house in Broad Street, red brick, with nine rooms
the weedgrown graveyard with its rows of tombs
the jail from which imprisoned faces grinned
at stiff palmettos flashing in the wind
the engine-house, with engines, and a tank
in which young alligators swam and stank,
the bell-tower, of red iron, where the bell
gonged of the fires in a tone from hell
magnolia trees with whitehot torch of bud
the yellow river between banks of mud
snake in the bog and locust in the hole
worn cigarette cards, of white battleships,
or flags, or chorus girls with scarlet lips,
jackstones of copper, peach tree in the yard
splashing ripe peaches on an earth baked hard
children beneath the arc-light in a romp
with Run sheep Run, and rice-birds in the swamp,
and then the north star nearer, and the snow
silent between the now and long ago
time like a train that roared from place to place
new crowds, new faces, for a single face
no longer then the chinaberry tree
nor the dark mockingbird to sing his glee
nor prawns nor catfish; icicles instead
and Indian-pipes, and cider in the shed
arbutus under pinewoods in the spring
and death remembered as a tropic thing
with picture postcard angels to upraise it
and trumpet vines and hummingbirds to phrase it
the latent heat of melting ice, the brief
hypotenuse from ecstasy to grief
amo amas, and then the cras amet,
the new-found eyes no slumber could forget,
Vivien, the affliction of the senses,
and conjugation of historic tenses
and Shakspere nearer come, and louder heard,
and the disparateness of flesh and word,
time growing swifter, and the pendulums
hands held, relinquished, faces come and gone,
kissed and forgotten, and become but one,
old shoes worn out, and new ones bought, the gloves
then Shakspere in the heart, the instant speech
and purposeless the footsteps eastward aimed
the bloodstream always slower, while the clock
followed the tired heart with louder knock,
fatigue upon the eye, the tardy springs
remember now the red house with nine rooms
play jackstones now and let your jackstones be
so to deceive yourself until you move
into that house whose tenants do not love.
Just for this evening, let's not mock them.
Not their curtsies or cross-garters
or ever-recurring pepper trees in their gardens
promising, promising.
At least they had ideas about love.
All day we've driven past cornfields, past cows poking their heads
through metal contraptions to eat.
We've followed West 84, and what else?
Irrigation sprinklers fly past us, huge wooden spools in the fields,
lounging sheep, telephone wires,
yellowing flowering shrubs.
Before us, above us, the clouds swell, layers of them,
the violet underneath of clouds.
Every idea I have is nostalgia. Look up:
darkened for days, eclipsing sun, eclipsing all other sound
with the thunder of their wings.
After a while, it must have seemed that they followed
not instinct or pattern but only
one another.
When they stopped, Audubon observed,
they broke the limbs of stout trees by the weight of the numbers.
Our hearts?
The Puritans thought that we are granted the ability to love
only through miracle,
but the troubadours knew how to burn themselves through,
how to make themselves shrines to their own longing.
The spectacular was never behind them.
Think of days of those scarlet-breasted, blue-winged birds above you.
Think of me in the garden, humming
quietly to myself in my blue dress,
a blue darker than the sky above us, a blue dark enough for storms,
though cloudless.
At what point is something gone completely?
The last of the sunlight is disappearing
Just for this evening, won't you put me before you
until I'm far enough away you can
believe in me?
my wonderful and less than.

Umber tail mount, 
Seven bubbles, sad 
Balk of night,
Red tulip lunges. 
Incandescent felt tips,
Small ochre waves
In the nape
Of greening brick.
Simile-clad branches
Vascular, the leather
Cusp of April
Or glass leaves: 
Nest of pages
In a sweep.
Coil helix rain. 
Congregation gully up.
Cold steel compress
Her rosy ways.
Rattle a cocoon,
Three twins falling
Combat lost nap
Wool in Woolf. 
Brittle sheep tossed,
Biotic petrol lagoon:
Ever after umber:
Where the knobby 
Moose pins glisten.
Hooked rug or
By the thousand
Field, bunch, vase,
Swooped pink neckline
Tailored as crinoline
Fringed, parrot, Rembrandt
Ovoid domesticated bowl.
Swivel in red
Armless white linen,
Visualization of unnatural 
Interactive selection bias:
What the daffodil
Could not accomplish. 
Owls curtain his 
Future, a violent 
Wave rumbling beneath
The brown floorboards.
Mother, impatient, tiny-
Fisted body crumpled
Against my chest,
Aquatic gulps of
Air, the owls,
Prickling our chests.
The bad finger
Points back, points
At the pointer.
Suddenness is other,
A numerical chill
Sphere machine, a
Pond jumps in 
To frog, insults 
Is mute sagas, 
Is daylight upended, 
Drunken, you sang 
The totem up:
The wind did 
What shrewd words 
So rarely do.
The village life, and every care that reigns
O'er youthful peasants and declining swains;
What labour yields, and what, that labour past,
Age, in its hour of languor, finds at last;
What forms the real picture of the poor,
Fled are those times, if e'er such times were seen, 
When rustic poets praised their native green;
No shepherds now, in smooth alternate verse,
Their country's beauty or their nymphs' rehearse;
Yet still for these we frame the tender strain,
Still in our lays fond Corydons complain,
And shepherds' boys their amorous pains reveal,
The only pains, alas! they never feel.
  On Mincio's banks, in Caesar's bounteous reign,
If Tityrus found the Golden Age again,
Must sleepy bards the flattering dream prolong,
Mechanic echoes of the Mantuan song?
From truth and nature shall we widely stray,
Where Virgil, not where Fancy, leads the way?
  Yes, thus the Muses sing of happy swains,
Because the Muses never knew their pains.
They boast their peasants' pipes, but peasants now
Resign their pipes and plod behind the plough;
And few amid the rural tribe have time
To number syllables and play with rhyme;
Save honest Duck, what son of verse could share
The poet's rapture and the peasant's care?
Or the great labours of the field degrade
With the new peril of a poorer trade?
  From one chief cause these idle praises spring,
That themes so easy few forbear to sing;
They ask no thought, require no deep design,
But swell the song and liquefy the line;
The gentle lover takes the rural strain,
A nymph his mistress and himself a swain;
With no sad scenes he clouds his tuneful prayer,
But all, to look like her, is painted fair.
I grant indeed that fields and flocks have charms
For him that gazes or for him that farms;
But when amid such pleasing scenes I trace
The poor laborious natives of the place,
And see the mid-day sun, with fervid ray,
On their bare heads and dewy temples play;
While some, with feebler heads and fainter hearts,
Deplore their fortune, yet sustain their parts:
Then shall I dare these real ills to hide
In tinsel trappings of poetic pride?
  No, cast by Fortune on a frowning coast,
Which can no groves nor happy valleys boast;
Where other cares than those the Muse relates,
And other shepherds dwell with other mates;
By such examples taught, I paint the cot,
As truth will paint it, and as bards will not:
Nor you, ye poor, of lettered scorn complain,
To you the smoothest song is smooth in vain;
O'ercome by labour and bowed down by time,
Feel you the barren flattery of a rhyme?
Can poets soothe you, when you pine for bread,
By winding myrtles round your ruined shed?
Can their light tales your weighty griefs o'erpower,
Or glad with airy mirth the toilsome hour?
  Lo! where the heath, with withering brake grown o'er,
Lends the light turf that warms the neighboring poor;
From thence a length of burning sand appears,
Where the thin harvest waves its withered ears;
Rank weeds, that every art and care defy,
Reign o'er the land and rob the blighted rye:
There thistles stretch their prickly arms afar,
And to the ragged infant threaten war;
There poppies, nodding, mock the hope of toil,
There the blue bugloss paints the sterile soil;
Hardy and high, above the slender sheaf,
The slimy mallow waves her silky leaf;
O'er the young shoot the charlock throws a shade,
And the wild tare clings round the sickly blade;
With mingled tints the rocky coasts abound,
And a sad splendor vainly shines around.
  So looks the nymph whom wretched arts adorn,
Betrayed by man, then left for man to scorn;
Whose cheek in vain assumes the mimic rose
While her sad eyes the troubled breast disclose;
Whose outward splendour is but folly's dress,
Exposing most, when most it gilds distress.
  Here joyless roam a wild amphibious race,
With sullen woe displayed in every face;
Who far from civil arts and social fly,
And scowl at strangers with suspicious eye.
  Here too the lawless merchant of the main
Draws from his plough th' intoxicated swain;
Want only claimed the labor of the day,
But vice now steals his nightly rest away.
  Where are the swains, who, daily labor done,
With rural games played down the setting sun;
Who struck with matchless force the bounding ball,
Or made the pond'rous quoit obliquely fall;
While some huge Ajax, terrible and strong,
Engaged some artful stripling of the throng,
And, foiled, beneath the young Ulysses fell,
When peals of praise the merry mischief tell?
To show the freighted pinnace where to land;
To load the ready steed with guilty haste;
To fly in terror o'er the pathless waste,
Or, when detected in their straggling course,
To foil their foes by cunning or by force;
Or, yielding part (when equal knaves contest),
To gain a lawless passport for the rest.
  Here, wand'ring long amid these frowning fields,
I sought the simple life that Nature yields;
Rapine and Wrong and Fear usurped her place,
And a bold, artful, surly, savage race;
Who, only skilled to take the finny tribe,
The yearly dinner, or septennial bribe
Wait on the shore and, as the waves run high,
On the tossed vessel bend their eager eye,
Which to their coast directs its vent'rous way,
Theirs, or the ocean's, miserable prey.
  As on their neighbouring beach yon swallows stand,
And wait for favoring winds to leave the land;
While still for flight the ready wing is spread:
So waited I the favouring hour, and fled;
Fled from these shores where guilt and famine reign,
And cried, Ah! hapless they who still remain;
Who still remain to hear the ocean roar,
Whose greedy waves devour the lessening shore;
Till some fierce tide, with more imperious sway,
Sweeps the low hut and all it holds away;
When the sad tenant weeps from door to door,
And begs a poor protection from the poor!
Gave a spare portion to the famished land;
Hers is the fault, if here mankind complain
Of fruitless toil and labor spent in vain;
But yet in other scenes, more fair in view,
And those who taste not, yet behold her store,
Are as the slaves that dig the golden ore,
The wealth around them makes them doubly poor.
Or will you deem them amply paid in health,
Labor's fair child, that languishes with wealth?
Go then! and see them rising with the sun,
Through a long course of daily toil to run;
Like him to make the plenteous harvest grow,
And yet not shard the plenty they bestow;
See them beneath the dog-star's raging heat,
When the knees tremble and the temples beat;
Behold them, leaning on their scythes, look o'er
The labour past, and toils to come explore;
See them alternate suns and showers engage,
And hoard up aches and anguish for their age;
Through fens and marshy moors their steps pursue,
When their warm pores imbibe the evening dew;
Then own that labour may as fatal be
To these thy slaves, as luxury to thee.
  Amid this tribe too oft a manly pride
Strives in strong toil the fainting heart to hide;
There may you see the youth of slender frame
Contend with weakness, weariness, and shame:
Yet urged along, and proudly loth to yield,
He strives to join his fellows of the field;
Till long-contending nature droops at last,
Declining health rejects his poor repast,
His cheerless spouse the coming danger sees,
And mutual murmurs urge the slow disease.
Yet grant them health, 'tis not for us to tell,
Though the head droops not, that the heart is well;
Or will you urge their homely, plenteous fare,
Healthy and plain and still the poor man's share!
Oh! trifle not with wants you cannot feel,
Nor mock the misery of a stinted meal;
Homely not wholesome, plain not plenteous, such
As you who envy would disdain to touch.
  Ye gentle souls, who dream of rural ease,
Whom the smooth stream and smoother sonnet please;
Go! if the peaceful cot your praises share,
Go, look within, and ask if peace be there:
Or theirs, that offspring round their feeble fire,
Or hers, that matron pale, whose trembling hand
Turns on the wretched hearth th' expiring brand.
Nor yet can time itself obtain for these
Life's latest comforts, due respect and ease;
For yonder see that hoary swain, whose age
Can with no cares except his own engage;
Who, propped on that rude staff, looks up to see
The bare arms broken from the withering tree,
On which, a boy, he climbed the loftiest bough,
Then his first joy, but his sad emblem now.
  He once was chief in all the rustic trade,
His steady hand the straightest furrow made;
Full many a prize he won, and still is proud
To find the triumphs of his youth allowed.
A transient pleasure sparkles in his eyes,
He hears and smiles, then thinks again and sighs:
For now he journeys to his grave in pain;
The rich disdain him, nay, the poor disdain;
Alternate masters now their slave command,
And urge the efforts of his feeble hand;
Who, when his age attempts its task in vain,
With ruthless taunts of lazy poor complain.
I
      Thou mastering me
    God! giver of breath and bread;
  World's strand, sway of the sea;
    Lord of living and dead;
 Thou hast bound bones & veins in me, fastened me flesh,
 And after it almost unmade, what with dread,
   Thy doing: and dost thou touch me afresh?
Over again I feel thy finger and find thee.
      I did say yes
    O at lightning and lashed rod;
  Thou heardst me truer than tongue confess
    Thy terror, O Christ, O God;
 Thou knowest the walls, altar and hour and night:
 The swoon of a heart that the sweep and the hurl of thee trod
   Hard down with a horror of height:
And the midriff astrain with leaning of, laced with fire of stress.
      The frown of his face
    Before me, the hurtle of hell
  Behind, where, where was a, where was a place?
    I whirled out wings that spell
 And fled with a fling of the heart to the heart of the Host.
 My heart, but you were dovewinged, I can tell,
   Carrier-witted, I am bold to boast,
To flash from the flame to the flame then, tower from the grace to the grace.
      I am soft sift
  Fast, but mined with a motion, a drift,
    And it crowds and it combs to the fall;
 I steady as a water in a well, to a poise, to a pane,
 But roped with, always, all the way down from the tall
   Fells or flanks of the voel, a vein
Of the gospel proffer, a pressure, a principle, Christ's gift.
      I kiss my hand
    To the stars, lovely-asunder
  Starlight, wafting him out of it; and
    Glow, glory in thunder;
 Kiss my hand to the dappled-with-damson west:
 Since, tho' he is under the world's splendour and wonder,
   His mystery must be instressed, stressed;
For I greet him the days I meet him, and bless when I understand.
      Not out of his bliss
    Springs the stress felt
  Nor first from heaven (and few know this)
 Stroke and a stress that stars and storms deliver,
   But it rides time like riding a river
(And here the faithful waver, the faithless fable and miss).
      It dates from day
    Of his going in Galilee;
  Warm-laid grave of a womb-life grey;
    Manger, maiden's knee;
 The dense and the driven Passion, and frightful sweat;
 Thence the discharge of it, there its swelling to be,
What none would have known of it, only the heart, being hard at bay,
      Is out with it! Oh,
    We lash with the best or worst
  Word last! How a lush-kept plush-capped sloe
    Will, mouthed to flesh-burst,
      Be adored among men,
  Wring thy rebel, dogged in den,
    Man's malice, with wrecking and storm.
 Beyond saying sweet, past telling of tongue,
 Thou art lightning and love, I found it, a winter and warm;
   Father and fondler of heart thou hast wrung:
Hast thy dark descending and most art merciful then.
      With an anvil-ding
    And with fire in him forge thy will
  Or rather, rather then, stealing as Spring
    Through him, melt him but master him still:
 Whether at once, as once at a crash Paul,
   Make mercy in all of us, out of us all
Mastery, but be adored, but be adored King.
                         II
    "Some find me a sword; some
    The flange and the rail; flame,
  Fang, or flood" goes Death on drum,
    And storms bugle his fame.
 Flesh falls within sight of us, we, though our flower the same,
    Wave with the meadow, forget that there must
The sour scythe cringe, and the blear share come.
    On Saturday sailed from Bremen,
    American-outward-bound,
  Take settler and seamen, tell men with women,
 O Father, not under thy feathers nor ever as guessing
 The goal was a shoal, of a fourth the doom to be drowned;
    Yet did the dark side of the bay of thy blessing
Not vault them, the million of rounds of thy mercy not reeve even them in?
    Into the snows she sweeps,
    Hurling the haven behind,
  The Deutschland, on Sunday; and so the sky keeps,
    For the infinite air is unkind,
 And the sea flint-flake, black-backed in the regular blow,
 Sitting Eastnortheast, in cursed quarter, the wind;
Spins to the widow-making unchilding unfathering deeps.
    She drove in the dark to leeward,
  But the combs of a smother of sand: night drew her
    Dead to the Kentish Knock;
 And she beat the bank down with her bows and the ride of her keel:
 The breakers rolled on her beam with ruinous shock;
    And canvass and compass, the whorl and the wheel
Idle for ever to waft her or wind her with, these she endured.
    Hope had grown grey hairs,
    Hope had mourning on,
  Trenched with tears, carved with cares,
    Hope was twelve hours gone;
 And frightful a nightfall folded rueful a day
 Nor rescue, only rocket and lightship, shone,
    And lives at last were washing away:
    One stirred from the rigging to save
    The wild woman-kind below,
    He was pitched to his death at a blow,
 For all his dreadnought breast and braids of thew:
 They could tell him for hours, dandled the to and fro
    Through the cobbled foam-fleece, what could he do
With the burl of the fountains of air, buck and the flood of the wave?
    And they could not and fell to the deck
  (Crushed them) or water (and drowned them) or rolled
    With the sea-romp over the wreck.
 Night roared, with the heart-break hearing a heart-broke rabble,
    Till a lioness arose breasting the babble,
A prophetess towered in the tumult, a virginal tongue told.
    Ah, touched in your bower of bone
    Are you! turned for an exquisite smart,
  Have you! make words break from me here all alone,
 O unteachably after evil, but uttering truth,
 Why, tears! is it? tears; such a melting, a madrigal start!
    Never-eldering revel and river of youth,
What can it be, this glee? the good you have there of your own?
    Sister, a sister calling
  And the inboard seas run swirling and hawling;
    The rash smart sloggering brine
 Blinds her; but she that weather sees one thing, one;
 Has one fetch in her: she rears herself to divine
    Ears, and the call of the tall nun
To the men in the tops and the tackle rode over the storm's brawling.
    She was first of a five and came
  (O Deutschland, double a desperate name!
    O world wide of its good!
 But Gertrude, lily, and Luther, are two of a town,
 Christ's lily and beast of the waste wood:
    From life's dawn it is drawn down,
Abel is Cain's brother and breasts they have sucked the same.)
    Loathed for a love men knew in them,
    Banned by the land of their birth,
  Rhine refused them, Thames would ruin them;
    Surf, snow, river and earth
 Gnashed: but thou art above, thou Orion of light;
 Thy unchancelling poising palms were weighing the worth,
    Thou martyr-master: in thy sight
    Five! the finding and sake
    And cipher of suffering Christ.
  Mark, the mark is of man's make
    And the word of it Sacrificed.
 But he scores it in scarlet himself on his own bespoken,
    Stigma, signal, cinquefoil token
For lettering of the lamb's fleece, ruddying of the rose-flake.
returning home or leaving to see a friend,
they come. They emerge from behind pillars and trees
approaching you like a pack hounding a sheep.
so you stop and light a cigarette, waiting for them.
your soup served and your dish not ready yet,
they come. A steady hand falls upon your shoulder.
You are familiar with such a hand
The scared diners are sneaking out,
but you are sitting there waiting for the bill.
Sometimes when you open your office,
planning to finish an article in three hours,
or read a review, but first make some tea,
they come. They spring out from behind the door
like ghosts welcoming a child to their lair.
You are figuring how to send a message home.
Sometimes when you have worked day and night,
dog tired, and want to have a good sleep
after a shower and an extra nightcap,
they come. They change the color of your dream:
you moan for the wounds on your body,
you weep for the fates of others.
Only now you dare to fight back with your hands,
brings you back to silence and sleeplessness again.
See, they come.
I think it moves. And we move with it. And keep moving.
No one knows time better than they. Always and forever.
Our family. Mama, me, Angie, Gilbert, Earl, Louise.
Kids. Daddy working in Skull Valley for the AT&SF RY.
Mama just packed us up in New Mexico and moved us. 
Suddenly. A surprise. To me anyway. To join Daddy.
Who was away most of the time. Arizona. California.
Sometimes Colorado. Sometimes Texas. Always away.
Railroad work, labor, heavy machinery. Rails and sun.
Trains always moving. I remember the war. The 1940s.
Soldiers. Tanks. Cannons with huge guns and wheels.
It moves. And we move with it. Though for boys, maybe?
I wanted to wait. So things could happen more gently. 
A boy misses his father. A boy watches younger sisters.
And he misses the times his mother is happy, laughing.
Who knows time as well as boys and their young worries?
I was a boy growing within a family, community. And dreams.
And girls. Girl teenagers. I adored them, their pretty ways.
In the fourth grade at McCartys. Made a bookshelf in shop.
Proudly. Sanded. Varnished. Shiny. For my Mama.
With love. I wanted to be a good carpenter like my Dad.
Dad drank though. Dark moods. Dark scary times. Danger.
And words hurtful, abrasive, accusing. Anger, pain, scorn.
A boy wonders. About time. About forever. When it ends.
I loved my Dad. Wonderful. Skilled man. Artist, singer.
Precious and assuring. Yet. Yet. Unpredictable moments.
You can never tell about time either. Like that, it is. It is.
We farmed. Corn, melons, chili, beets, carrots, cilantro.
Onions. Even potatoes in little mounds but they died.
Corn fields at night. Irrigating. June nights. I loved forever.
My grandpa I loved very much. Time was soothing then.
And with him they were. A healer and respected kiva elder.
Herded his sheep. Along with my uncle Estevan. And Roy.
Roy was a strange one. Chinese manner. So people said.
From Chinatown in California. He had a gentle soft smile.
And a storyteller he was. Yes. About his horse. Lightning.
Yes, ride to see his girl to call her outside. Estella! Estella!

And because mothers are always loving. Alert. Ever caring.
Mama decided we must go to Skull Valley where Dad was.
Up to Grants, the depot there, we got on the westbound train.
Sacks and boxes, a trunk, suitcase or two. Clothes, things.
We never had much. Poor. And lonely for Dad always away.
Father gone. Mother and kids left behind. Is it like that?
The slave rules. The company. Trains powerful, unending.
Time I thought was in the trains. Fast, loud, dangerous. 
Soldiers, army troop trains, going east and going west.
Unending. I wondered where they were all going. Where?
Lightning and thunder trapped in the train power and steel. 
Yet I yearned for blue song. Hollow and lonely long tone.
Coming round the bend, and something beyond the horizon. 
Far away maybe. Travel. Some other dream. Youth. Yes.
I liked songs. Music I heard on the radio. Hank Williams.
And stories that rang through the air. Talk and listening.
It was the first time ever we were leaving the reservation.
Only one world till then it seemed. Acoma community. Ours.
On the edge of another world though, something strange. 
And fearful too. The dark moments. Like when Daddy drank.
When there was fire from another world. An unknown.
Yet fascinating somehow, oddly, something on the far horizon.
Like riding thunder. The horse, Lightning, Roy talked about.
Riding off somewhere into the dark night. Fast, fast. Fast.
Riding toward night. We watched the land speeding away.
Far across the land, along the edge of it was a highway.
With cars and trucks. Moving, moving. Only slower.
Time speeds, like you speed. Only not an awareness.
Or any way to tell what is taking place. When young.
Youth is not the time when time is apparent. Too slow.
At Ashfork we got off the train onto the depot platform.
I sensed being lost. Lost mother and lost children. Dusk. 
Where was this world? Where did home go? Children?
Lost at the edge of a strange world with a gray green depot.
Large letters painted. Little sister is hungry. She whimpers.
It could be Indians. A family, mother and children. Lost?
Where are they going? Up the street I think. Looking.
For something to eat. My mother held only a little money.
Hamburgers we split. Water and water. Self-conscious.
Moment is time. I looked out and saw a train passing.
Wait. Then a train down Chino Valley. Long-distance night.
Stars vanished in too much night. Long day into night.
Where does time go? Does it go nowhere but into night?
Then at the sudden edge. The horizon. A vast bowl of light.
And only at the far end, trees. And still far ahead of us. 
The train engine light. Always a light showing the way.
My brother and I excited. A deer stunned by train light. 
Stilled. Stark. A cut stone. The dazzling moment held us.
Youth and time. Nothing like it. Thrilled. Never until then.
Years later I tried to tell about that moment to a love.
The horizon and beyond. Full of stars. Even unseen.
Always belief is firmer than faith. With and without dreams.
We arrived in Skull Valley early in the morning. Three-thirty?
Where were we? On the other side of the moon from Acoma.
A mother and her children and assorted bags and boxes.
Dreams. Time. Horizon. Farther from home than belief. 
A train depot on the other side of the moon. Deserted. 
After the train pulled away. Only the rails and starshine.
With a visor. Sitting at a tall wooden desk with shelves.
And a metal puzzle thing making clicking-clacking noises.
Who spoke with Mama. Who smiled. Who wondered at us. 
An Indian woman with Indian children. Who were strangers.
Like we just came from the planet Acoma. The other side.
Of day. Of the present early morning night in that moment.
The telegrapher with the visor said. I think. I think he did.
He knew my father. Knew where he lived. Two miles away.
So we took a road. Early, early morning night trek. Time.
Shimmers in an odd amazing way. Within what might be.
A boy and a story. The dawn coming. Horizon ever so near.
When we knocked on his railroad worker housing door.
Daddy was shocked. In his underwear. Shadows upon.
We come to discover each other. All failures and gains. 
Counting and mattering, no matter the time or sequence.
Once again together. Family, history, travel, time, love.
To say what time is, even fifty years in the past to now.
In this moment, Skull Valley is just as real as it ever was.
Memory we cross and cross again. Treks, trauma, and on.
We do know what time is. It is loss and gain. A lingering.
Within discovery we come to ourselves. Finding. Destiny.
Moments recalled like friends. It was that way or another.
Skull Valley. A time for a boy. History engulfed beyond.
When I went back. Recently. I ate with friends at the cafe.
By the railroad track. I was fascinated by photographs.
Of the mountain lions in the mountains nearby. Ever there.
No matter what. And the stories of bones. Tall tales or truths.
Our history is more than here. We know more than realize.
Stalk us, just like they found. A boy. More than fifty years ago. 
He discovered a world beyond Acoma. A world apart.
And a world together as time, memory, as story. As his own.
We seek and are found. Secure. Actual. Safe. And serene.
Last summer near Prescott that boy fifty vast years later.
Found carved images on stone walls that fit his hands.
Carved in time. Eternal as stone. Past and present. Ever.

He's gone, and all our plans
 We'll walk no more on Cotswold
 His body that was so quick
 Knew it, on Severn river
 You would not know him now ...
 Nobly, so cover him over
 Cover him, cover him soon!
Thou art not, Penshurst, built to envious show,
Of touch or marble; nor canst boast a row
Of polished pillars, or a roof of gold;
Thou hast no lantern, whereof tales are told,
And, these grudged at, art reverenced the while.
Of wood, of water; therein thou art fair.
Thou hast thy walks for health, as well as sport;
Thy mount, to which the dryads do resort,
Where Pan and Bacchus their high feasts have made,
Beneath the broad beech and the chestnut shade;
That taller tree, which of a nut was set
At his great birth where all the Muses met.
Of many a sylvan, taken with his flames;
And thence the ruddy satyrs oft provoke
Thy copse too, named of Gamage, thou hast there,
That never fails to serve thee seasoned deer
When thou wouldst feast or exercise thy friends.
The lower land, that to the river bends,
Thy sheep, thy bullocks, kine, and calves do feed;
The middle grounds thy mares and horses breed.
Each bank doth yield thee conies; and the tops,
To crown thy open table, doth provide
The purpled pheasant with the speckled side;
The painted partridge lies in every field,
And for thy mess is willing to be killed.
And if the high-swollen Medway fail thy dish,
Thou hast thy ponds, that pay thee tribute fish,
Fat aged carps that run into thy net,
And pikes, now weary their own kind to eat,
As loath the second draught or cast to stay,
Officiously at first themselves betray;
Bright eels that emulate them, and leap on land
Before the fisher, or into his hand.
Then hath thy orchard fruit, thy garden flowers,
Fresh as the air, and new as are the hours.
The early cherry, with the later plum,
Fig, grape, and quince, each in his time doth come;
The blushing apricot and woolly peach 
Hang on thy walls, that every child may reach.
And though thy walls be of the country stone,
But all come in, the farmer and the clown,
And no one empty-handed, to salute
Thy lord and lady, though they have no suit.
Some bring a capon, some a rural cake,
Some nuts, some apples; some that think they make
The better cheeses bring them, or else send
By their ripe daughters, whom they would commend
This way to husbands, and whose baskets bear
An emblem of themselves in plum or pear.
But what can this (more than express their love)
Add to thy free provisions, far above
The need of such? whose liberal board doth flow
With all that hospitality doth know;
Where comes no guest but is allowed to eat,
Where the same beer and bread, and selfsame wine,
And I not fain to sit (as some this day
Here no man tells my cups; nor, standing by,
A waiter doth my gluttony envy,
But gives me what I call, and lets me eat;
He knows below he shall find plenty of meat.
The tables hoard not up for the next day;
Nor, when I take my lodging, need I pray
For fire, or lights, or livery; all is there,
As if thou then wert mine, or I reigned here:
That found King James when, hunting late this way
With his brave son, the prince, they saw thy fires
Shine bright on every hearth, as the desires
Of thy Penates had been set on flame
To entertain them; or the country came
With all their zeal to warm their welcome here.
What (great I will not say, but) sudden cheer
On thy good lady then, who therein reaped
The just reward of her high housewifery;
To have her linen, plate, and all things nigh,
When she was far; and not a room but dressed
As if it had expected such a guest!
These, Penshurst, are thy praise, and yet not all.
His children thy great lord may call his own,
A fortune in this age but rarely known.
They are, and have been, taught religion; thence
Their gentler spirits have sucked innocence.
Each morn and even they are taught to pray,
With the whole household, and may, every day,
The mysteries of manners, arms, and arts.
Now, Penshurst, they that will proportion thee
With other edifices, when they see
Those proud, ambitious heaps, and nothing else,
May say their lords have built, but thy lord dwells.

Until wolf-light I will count my sheep,
Night is already a thirsty county in Texas,
Of suffering corrupts us, all punishments
That harry labyrinths of concrete corridors,

That shows, if opened, the neon, pleading heart 
You perform penalties others have scripted, so
The dark has no teeth. While men like you live
tomorrow we'll see the lightbulb in schenectady,
go to gems farms in schodack, then on to howe caverns,
then to see the wayne thiebaud show at the clark
where we'll stop to notice the melting ice sculpture
then excellent spinach sap soup at the thai restaurant
in williamstown, a brief stop at the octagonal museum,
on to northampton to see the smith college art museum
& greenhouse where we'll see a green heron
it would be nice to be able to walk today
so we could go to opus 40 in saugerties
followed by a dinner of oysters & mussels at the bear
then on to check out the sheep at the sheepherding inn
where we're able to buy riccotta cheese
which means twice-baked, with which we're able
to make a pizza with fresh figs gotten from the berry farm
the poplars of blood have fallen asleep.

and the sheep bells are seasoned with shadow.
a dog etches its pastoral howl.
A working river, a working valley,
Lined with workings, heaps of dust, gravel, cement,
Like the island exporting itself to its neighbors one barge at a time.
The river, the road, and the railway,
A plait, a tangle, a place of through.
The river not navigable, the boggy valley floor not walkable,
The locals came down from the mountains a little way
To site castles on moraine and regulate trade.
Hannibal marched his elephants through here, dynamited rocks with vinegar.
Two-hundred-some years ago.
Goethe came to visit.
The shade endures.
Rilke was reminded of Spain.
He lived among apricots at Muzot,
Just the other side of the language barrier,
And fixed to be buried with a view of France.
No one knows who I am, were his dying words.
Smells of hay and dung, the murmurs of subtle conversation
Next door are tax-efficient sheep
The underground chicken palace like CERN
Or a discreet gun emplacement.
Larchwood and rye bread, chocolate and slate,
Dried beef and stone
All one striated substance,
The staff of life breaking explosively, crumblingly,
If it breaks at all,
A stash of daunting verticals,
A washing machine delivered by helicopter
Winched down into the Renaissance casbah.
Time was a man had to carry his donkey across his shoulders up a cliff;
Now everything is tunnel fodder.
Electricity and water come piped through the mountains,
The vineyards get a sousing under great rainbow arcs,
With light sensors and cold running water
Off the hills and a chill in the sunny air of the contemporary archaic.
1
One man held the huge pig down
and the other stuck an ice pick
into the jugular, which is when
we started to pay attention.
The blood rose ten feet with force
while the sow swam on its back
as if to cut its own neck.
Its fatty back smacked the slippery
cement while the assassins shuffled
to keep their balance, and the bloody
fountain rose and fell back and rose
less and less high, until
the red plume reentered the pig
at the neck, and the belly collapsed
and the pig face went dull.
2
I knew the pig
lived mainly behind our garage.
Sometimes turkeys, always
roosters and sheep. Once the windmill
turned two days without stopping.
The butcher would walk in his apron
straight for the victim. The others
would scratch and babble
and get in the way.
Then the butcher would lead the animal
to the back door of his shop,
stopping to kill it on a stump.
It was always evening, after closing.
The sea breeze would be rising,
cloaking the hour in brine.
3
The pig we saw slaughtered
was more than twice anything
shut up in the patch
we trespassed to make havoc.
Since the butcher was Italian,
not Jewish, that would be his pig.
Like the barber who carried
a cigar box of bets
to the stationery store, like
the Greek who made sweets
and hid Greek illegals,
the butcher had a business, his
business, by which he took
from our hands the cleaver and serrated
knife for the guts,
and gave us back in butcher paper
and outer layers of brown wrapping
our lives for their cries.
4
Hung up to drain, the great pig,
hacked into portions,
looked like a puzzle
we could put together in the freezer
to make a picture of
a pig of course, a map, clothes or other things
when we looked.
You know, the white guy
In the film version of Raisin In The Sun,
Pudgy balding head,
Who comes to tell
The black family
Not to move to the
White Chicago suburb.
The man who smiles
With the knife,
Who IS a knife,
But fools them for
A second, because
The way he expects
Them to look at him.
Later, as they mop
Up the blood, they replay
What he said: that he
Was elected by his neighbors,
Can get his foot in the door,
Whipped and rumpled,
Since he popped out of his
Close, personal friend of sorry.
This is the way the knife
Gets through the door, and
He sits there, as they
Knife in sheep clothes, baaa
Baaa, baaa; such a foolish-looking,
Goofy little white guy.
A small part of them, quietly
Thinking that about him.
They can barely hold their
His trick, the trick of the knife
And the strangest thing
About this, the damn thing
Is how meek he still looks
After he cuts, and cuts again.
Dun as a female robin,
His tongue slices and whittles.
He is singing the song of his
Brood; money if you stay,
Fire if you come, as they think:
How did a white robe, a tinder cross,
Their door? A pack of Dobermans
Except that Dobermans of course, never
Apologize.
In fresh snow that fell on old snow
I see wild roses in bloom, springtime,
an orchard of apple and peach trees in bloom,
lovers of different preferences
walking naked in new snow, not shivering,
no illusion, no delusion, no bluebells.
Why should I live by reality that murders?
I wear a coat of hope and desire.
I follow fallen maple leaves abducted by the wind.
I declare I am a Not Quite, almost a nonentity.
I lift up and button my collar of hope.
I simply refuse to leave the universe.
I had fifty great-great-grand-grandmothers
who got to Paradise, like Enoch, without dying.
Once my friends and I went out in deep paradise snow
with Saint Bernards and Great Pyrenees
to find those lost in the blizzard that God made for Himself
because He prefers not seeing what happens on earth.
With touch He can hear, taste, smell, see,
and He has fourteen other senses there are no words for.
Memory, He said, is a sense, not a power.
Who am I to disagree with Him?
There are some vegetarians among you,
so I will tell you what He eats.
He picks His teeth. I think I heard Him say,
He told me to carry on.
He resents hearing the prayers and praise of sycophants.
Original blasphemy amuses Him, describes
His coitus with living creatures,
mothers, His self,
a whale, a male praying mantis dying to mate.
Instead of a prayer rug,
I stitch Him a pillow of false proverbs:
I asked Him if I ever did anything he liked.
and they married. I blessed that wedding,
He said He was not speaking to me,
He waved, He did not say goodbye.

Rain fell as a glass 
breaks,
something suddenly everywhere at the same time.

To live like a painting 
eye to eye with the doorway,
down at the hair,
up at your own dusty feet. 

said my bird heart to my heart of the cricket, 
and I entered.

The happy see only happiness,
the living see only life,
the young see only the young,
as lovers believe
they wake always beside one also in love.

However often I turned its pages,
I kept ending up 
as the same two sentences of the book:
The being of some is: to be. Of others: to be without.
Then I fell back asleep, in Swedish.

A sheep grazing is unimpressed by the mountain
but not by its flies.

The grief
a door closed from inside.
The weight of the grass 
dividing
walking through it.

What is the towel, what is the water, 
changes,
though of we three, 
only the towel can be held upside down in the sun.

Said not in self-pity or praise.
This dignity we allow barn owl, 
ego, oyster.
