
You will leave your home:
nothing will hold you.
You will wear dresses of gold; skins
of silver, copper, and bronze.
The sky above you will shift in meaning
each time you think you understand.
You will spend a lifetime chipping away layers
of flesh. The shadow of your scales
will always remain. You will be marked
by sulphur and salt.
You will bathe endlessly in clear streams and fail
to rid yourself of that scent.
Your feet will never be your own.
Stone will be your path.
Storms will follow in your wake,
destroying all those who take you in.
You will desert your children
kill your lovers and devour their flesh.
You will love no one
but the wind and ache of your bones.
Neither will love you in return.
With age, your hair will grow matted and dull,
your skin will gape and hang in long folds,
your eyes will cease to shine.
But nothing will be enough.
The sea will never take you back.

Here in the electric dusk your naked lover
tips the glass high and the ice cubes fall against her teeth.
It's beautiful Susan, her hair sticky with gin,
Our Lady of Wet Glass-Rings on the Album Cover,
streaming with hatred in the heat
as the record falls and the snake-band chords begin
to break like terrible news from the Rolling Stones,
August,
just so much feverishly produced kazoo music,
this exhaustion mutilated to resemble passion,
the bogus moon of tenderness and magic
you hold out to each prisoner like a cup of light?

When Emperor Hirohito announced
his divinity was broken, fell away
and settled in fine gold dust at his feet.
His people understood the gravity
over the airwaves with a human voice,
ordinary and flecked with static. A god
does not speak in the common voice
of the earthbound, thick with shame.
At the station, my mother, a schoolgirl,
looked on as men in uniform lurched
from the platform into the path
of incoming trains, their slack bodies
landing on the tracks without sound.

Berkeley psychologists told Harold
his anger was justified. What parents
let their child go for a midnight walk
been more than four, Harold told
the doctor in her crisp beige office.
Doctor, could it ever be OK
for a four-year-old to eat nine
different types of pie? Harold asked her.
Call me Lisa, the doctor replied.
Everyone knew Harold could draw.
By sophomore year, he was critiquing
grad students. By twenty, Harold knew
exactly when to quote Sontag. Standing
of Mojave succulents: This just makes me think
how in place of a hermeneutics, we need
would hum & nod their dragon heads
(though none of them understood, exactly,
what Harold said). By senior year, Harold
became distant, his work increasingly angry:
apple trees, their fruit rotting in monochrome
purple, under the notable lack of a moon.

my first drink was in my mother
my next, my bris. doctor spread red
wine across my lips. took my foreskin

no one knows the origins of alcohol. tho surely an accident
before sacrament. agricultural apocrypha. enough grain stored up
for it to get weird in the cistern. rot gospel. god water

brandy was used to treat everything
from colds to pneumonia
frostbite to snake bites

tb patients were placed on ethanol drips
tonics & cough medicines
spooned into the crying mouths of children

each friday in synagogue a prayer for red
at dinner, the cemetery, the kitchen
spirits

how many times have i woke
strange in an unfamiliar bed?
my head neolithic

my grandfather died with a bottle in one hand
& flowers in the other. he called his drink his medicine
he called his woman

i can only half blame alcohol for my overdose
the other half is my own hand

if you look close at the process of fermentation

the wino outside the liquor store
mistakes me for his son

Anoint your dead
poems.

Put them in a little boat called
our little joke.

Tell them to wear all their gold.

Life is short, though I keep this from my children.
in a thousand delicious, ill-advised ways,
a thousand deliciously ill-advised ways
estimate, though I keep this from my children.
For every bird there is a stone thrown at a bird.
For every loved child, a child broken, bagged,
sunk in a lake. Life is short and the world
is at least half terrible, and for every kind
stranger, there is one who would break you,
though I keep this from my children. I am trying
to sell them the world. Any decent realtor,
about good bones: This place could be beautiful,
right? You could make this place beautiful.

I thank you for breaking the cycle, withstanding the enormity

Thank you to the policeman who took all the men whose safety

all the world to blame.

Thank you for picking up the handless, footless doll

and wait, patiently.

you wanted the end 

with a serpentine 
greed. How to negotiate

that strangling 
mist, the fibrous

whisper?

To cease to exist 
and to die

are two different things entirely.

But you knew this, 

Some days you knelt on coins 
in those yellow hours. 

You lit a flame

to your shadow 
and ate

scorpions with your naked fingers.

So touched by the sadness of hair
in a dirty sink.

The malevolent smell 
of soap.

When instead of swallowing a fistful
of white pills,

you decided to shower,

the palm trees
nodded in agreement,

a choir 
of crickets singing 

behind your swollen eyes.

The masked bird 
turned to you 

with a shred of paper hanging
from its beak.

At dusk, 
hair wet and fragrant,

and kissed 
his trembling horns. 

The ghost? 

It fell prostrate,
passed through you 

like a swift 
and generous storm.

Dazzling emptiness of the black green end of summer no one
running in the yard pulse pulse the absence.

Leave them not to the empty yards.

They resembled a family. Long quiet hours. Sometimes
one was angry sometimes someone called her "wife"
someone's hair receding.

An uptick in the hormone canopy embodied a restlessness
and oh what to do with it.

(How she arrived in a hush in a looking away and not looking.)

It had been some time since richness intangible
and then they made a whole coat of it.

Meanwhile August moved toward its impervious finale.
A mood by the river. Gone. One lucid rush carrying them along.

You can't argue beauty's not an accident, the particular heft and angle
of a chromosome's spin. A tarted spangle, bright lanyard twist, the slip
of cells weighting this boat uneven from stern to prow. We're all

it fades, we say, something about years and sun, the nights we slept
in makeup and left mascara like ashes on the pillowcase. We burned

through every one of our dreams. I wasn't always a stepmother, you know.
There were whole years when I was a girl. But now, these ladies
sell me moisturizer, stand close in their lab coats, pretending at science

in a fog of perfume. They wield a contour brush and my cheekbone pops.
The magic settles uneasy; it turns out fairy dust was always
fake. And the lipstick's made from beetles, shells crushed vermillion.

My color is Fleshpot, they say, it's Folie or Fixation. It's Wilderness;
it's Artificial Earth. They can't quite make themselves care.
We'll waste it, they know, whatever we've been given.

Let it be said
that Tim's year was divided
into two seasons: sneakers
and flip-flops. Let us
remember that Tim
would sometimes throw a football
with all the requisite grip, angle
and spiral-talk. Let us recall
that for the sake of what was left
of appearances, my mother
never once let him sleep
in her bed; he snored all over
our dog-chewed couch, and in
the mornings when I tip-toed
past him on my way
to school, his jowls
fat as a catcher's mitt, I never cracked
an empty bottle across that space
where his front teeth
rotted out. Nor did I touch
a struck match to that mole
to all lovelorn women.
Still, let us remember
sweetness: Tim lying face down,
Mom popping the zits
that dotted his broad, sun-spotted back,
which, though obviously
gross, gets the January photo
in my personal wall calendar
of what love should be,
if such a calendar
could still exist above my kitchen table
junked up with the heretos and
therefores from my
last divorce.
how my mother would slip
and Tim would say,
"Your mother is beautiful,"
before getting up
to go dance with someone else.
confess that I pedaled
my ten-speed
across the Leaf River bridge
all the way to Tim's
other woman's house
and lay with that woman's daughter
beside the moon-
cold weight
of the propane tank, dumb
with liquor, numb to
the fire ants that we spread
our blanket over until
I stopped for a second
and looked up
because I wondered if
her mother could hear us,
or if Tim might not
have stood in the kitchen,
maybe looked out
the window and saw
my white ass pumping
in the moonlight,
and whispered
to himself, "That's my boy."

We practiced together,
sweat and stained.
We pummeled each other 
and laughed off pain.
Teams may disagree,
may tease,
may blame.
Teams may bicker and whine,
but get down for the game.

You had my back.
We fought the fight.
And though our score
was less last night,
we're walking tall.
Our team came through
and stuck together like Crazy Glue.
I'm proud to say
I lost with you.

Because she'd heard him laugh through new moon darkness
and she knew he'd fallen and she knew, before she turned,

because she tried to love the straight back and neck
he'd erected to recollect the man he'd been

the dark coils areoling both her breasts and all the ways
she bent and lifted, bent and lifted, steady, strong.

She let him believe he was past due for a harvest
and her hands were the right ones, now, to hold onto the scythe.
 

She made quick work of pleasure. The boysmile bunked down
in his eyes, she claimed. Her tongue found the place in his mouth

until they grew soft enough to chew. History had bedded him

blood had married brine. She'd watch that man be whipped into something
good for nothing more than fertilizing clay and she'd thought

buckshot would have been a brand of kindness if sprayed into him
just then. But even after his hard going, she did not miss him very much.

Anyone she chose could be shucked like surplus property tomorrow,
but that hadn't been enough to warn her off of picking him that night.
Because she knew if she set her sight on nothing she'd get nothing

in return, she'd walked with him. But because the night progressed so
over the branch of a dead and down tree. In all that darkness,

there, without a moon, even then, she had not fallen. She thought
to say so, but she did not say so. She did nothing
but say she was sorry for him. She did not use her mouth

to say this. Could he not listen to her hands? They spoke softly,
articulating her condolences, to his torn and bleeding skin.
1 
1

Claude says he, too, was given the tracks and not 
beyond that bend, or the next. The place 

more news from hoboes than from the mailman.

But you know nothing of the train as it passes 
behind the backs of grander houses, gutted 

warehouses, chained dogs, as it grazes an alien 
Or that when it passes beneath the underside 

of a bridge, a boy your own age waves the way 
and one that does, only to lower it again.

2 
2

You are a grown man when the train comes 
to a scalding stop, and a lantern swings down 
the road. A man has been killed, they call out 

know his hat, and that burn scar on the back 

of his hand. What you know of his wife
you do not say and will not even the next 

night when you sit up with the body in the house 
he wanted that much shut of, her voice rigid 
as its walls while the train you hear out there in the darkness 

passes by the way it always does, as though 
the same, the very same, and, again, on 
the time it will this night be able to keep.
a time machine, you start to play the air
guitar of memory, making a country
so you can walk back into it, like a man
on rewind in a silent film, his whiskey tumbler
filling up again as he rises from his stool
and steps backwards towards the avenue, where
the cars, cabs, trucks reverse away from him,
and the lights, for once, turn amber to green;
where the two hands on his watch unravel time,
of knitting over the dropped stitch that means
she must go back before she can go on.
You raise the record from its sleeve again,
hold it grail-like into the wayward light
all wrong. Wind in the sycamores outside,
rain coming down in a town you left behind
and not this one, where the backward longing
cat with a broken spine dragging itself off
into the undergrowth to die. Where the silence
might give way to a high-hat or snare drum,
the lub-dub of the bass, a brass section.
After a long absence, you take up the thread again,
take up the line, what you listen for,
try not to listen for, stirring the tiny hairs
within your inner ear, weighting the wet tip
of your tongue, like the scuff and fumble
of the blind needle finding its way from silence
to the first track on side one. You nod
the steering wheel of the car in which you pass
under a strobe of stars, a quarter moon,
until, despite yourself, you are sixteen
again and walking home in a downpour
with your Ken Dodd quiff, your flowers of sulfur,
a tune to name the afternoon. Its scattered
showers with a chance of sunny spells later,
its gust and bluster from Rathlin to Cape Clear.
This one would sound good in a stadium.
a chorus that staggers smitten toward
on just six strings until the horns cut in,
like the bully at a prom. It recalls the taste
of cigarettes and bubblegum on the tongue
of the first girl you ever kissed. All broken glass
and bruised finger, its swoon circles forever
the turntable in that blue room where you
fed and watered every slight and scar. And so
who provides the harmonies and made the tea;
the trumpet player, his spit still wet in the mouth
of a solo that the vinyl keeps pristine,
black box recorder to your submerged plane.
The singer with a bone stuck in her throat,
The producer, who fills in on Hammond organ.
You could go on like this, lost in the noise
again, in your baroque joy at what was
and is, and what the words become, talking
to yourself in the second person, as if
on a life you measure song by song.

do you remember the first time you were called annoying?
how your breath stopped short in your chest
the way the light drained from your eyes, though you knew your cheeks were ablaze
the way your throat tightened as you tried to form an argument that got lost on your tongue?
your eyes never left the floor that day.
you were 13.

apologies littering every other sentence,
i could listen to you forever, though i know speaking for more than 3 uninterrupted minutes makes you anxious.
all i want you to know is that you deserve to be heard
for 3 minutes
for 10 minutes
for 2 hours 
forever.

there will be people who cannot handle your grace, your beauty, your wisdom, your heart;
and have never been

and saw that it was as good as everything else.
A yellow school bus rattled down the lane,
a wind blew in a drainpipe, strong, mellifluous.

I brought two empty crates to the parking lot,
watched neighbors with briefcases and car keys.
At noon a mailman passed by where I sat
invisible, like a tree among trees.

Why, why, I asked. I wanted to know why,
but only scared a squirrel that dropped his acorn
a white noise in a wireless telephone.

My club soda went flat in the bottle. With a spit
of rain, a wind blew again from the lake.
I raised my index finger and touched it,
pleading, give me a break, give me a break.

We, the naturally hopeful,
Need a simple sign
 We who love precise language
 Need a finer way to convey
 Disappointment and perplexity.
 For speechlessness and all its inflections,
 For up-ended expectations,
 By trivial or stupefying irony,
 For pure incredulity, we need
 The inverted exclamation point.
 For the dropped smile, the limp handshake,
 For whoever has just unwrapped a dumb gift
 Or taken the first sip of a flat beer,
 Or felt love or pond ice
 Give way underfoot, we deserve it.
 We need it for the air pocket, the scratch shot,
 The odyssey that ends up in Weehawken.
 As I sit outside the Caffe Reggio
 Staring at my espresso and cannoli
 After this middle-aged couple
 Came strolling by and he suddenly
 Veered and sneezed all over my table

A hoot is a hilarious person. Perhaps train
scream or owl, jeer. Often done by mouth.
A man may widen owl wide and give one away.
Sometimes a hoot may be kept and saved
A woman may sharpen a hoot
in the toolshed with the bread knives. So there
may be a toolshed, and this may be where the knives are kept
come at you with those wings. So when waiting in the tool-
shed hoot runs its owl talon over the knives. Else
it comes at you, other it stares.

foot on the world and held it there, waiting for the Major
to come. These were the days when extra layers
and less and not at all. In the case of the two-term moniker,

may wait for you with its long needles
a man gets baby-bird gaping with hunger. The Major
puts his wings inside and dies in Cook County Hospital
come warm in their linens to fold back the wings beside
themselves, like any good cook come to shut a mouth.

They never learned to tell 
one bird from another, a shrub

or when the season had

even if a berry

had ripened into poison. 
And yet they drew endless

distinctions between 
colors and polish and

and would not let

marry out.

their children, though they

them. They were known

trophies and peeling stars.

They burned things up
or wore them down, had ranks

machines that moved them

jewels and playing cards.

have been young, and young

They left a strange word

in a tree: croatoan,
and a track in the dust of Mars.

is not a man being swallowed by a fish
with eyes like eight-point throwing stars
a man being taken into the mouth of a woman
or being swallowed by his work

a man being swallowed up in smoke
he swallows the smoke, that blends around him like a thought
he shapes it so he lives inside a song

of a man being swallowed by his kin, his skin
a man being swallowed by the State
(Leviathan in 1948)
literally, eaten as a pathway to god

he cannot reach, cannot touch, cannot trace

who laughs and beats the dust from his clothes
a man tasting dust inside the laugh

a man with nothing to exchange
a rude man, his twin he leaves behind

a man being swallowed by his fault
with something old to show and new to hide

his youth, yield, luck, the law, his fear, the fog, his fame

a man being swallowed by his vows

in which he finds a man being swallowed by a fish
who exits into night at closing time
the figure of a man being swallowed by a fish.

He worked years on the tablet,
deciphering the pictographs. He knew
it was a kind of language, those images.
An eye. A bird, maybe a crow.
A basket of wheat. A ladder.
Did the order of the images matter?
He cross-referenced similar texts.
He studied the history of the region
and satisfied many hours in the tablet's service.
In a cousin language, a ladder
was the word for happiness, to rise up,
to be lifted above the ordinary.
After years of work, he sorted it out.
It was poetry, bad poetry, adolescent:
"Today, I am happy,
happy all this day, today."

The hinge of the year
the great gates opening
and then slowly slowly
closing on us.
 
I always imagine those gates
hanging over the ocean
fiery over the stone grey
waters of evening.
 
We cast what we must
change about ourselves
onto the waters flowing
to the sea. The sins,
 
errors, bad habits, whatever
you call them, dissolve.
When I was little I cried
out I! I! I! I want, I want.
 
Older, I feel less important,
a worker bee in the hive
of history, miles of hard
labor to make my sweetness.
 
The gates are closing
The light is failing
I kneel before what I love
imploring that it may live.
 
So much breaks, wears
down, fails in us. We must
their sharp shards in our hands.

A friend e-mails
how much are you
enjoying yourself?
a dripping faucet
loose cat litter
no doubt about it
a good world
is difficult I say
as if I were
tilling a field
ashamed of myself
I apologize
to the sleeping child

each participant simulated detachment but none
was actually single. Some, like the recently widowed,
were attached to ghosts. Others were legally attached
to a living person they once but no longer loved.
A surprising number loved their partners profoundly
while fearing said partners inhabited the category
of those who loved them no longer. These participants,
whose fears may or may not have been founded,
attempted to self-protect by labeling themselves single.
Soon a pattern emerged: those who feared abandonment
developed around them a planetary-like orbit
of potential new partners to whom they could not attach
because they were already attached. Such orbits lasted,
sometimes, for years. The orbiters went to self-help groups
Because they could not detach from their objects of unrequited
affection, they became the predominant clientele for future
singles cruises, unilaterally sustaining the singles cruise business.

Had death not had me in tears
I would have seen the barges
on life's stream sail.
I would have heard sorrow songs
in groves where the road was lost
long
where men foot prints mix with other men foot prints
By the road I wait
"death is better, death is better"
came the song
I am by the roadside
looking for the road
death is better, death is much better
Had death not had me in tears
I would have seen the barges
I would have found the road
and heard the sorrow songs.
The land wreathes in rhythm
with your soul, caressed by history
and cruel geography
landscape ineffable yet screaming
eloquent resonant like the drums
of after harvests.
We pile rocks on terracing love
Carry the pithy cloth
to cover the hearths of our mother.

Come now, you lucky ones
come to the festival of corn and lamb
to the finest feast of this land
come, now,
your lovers have unfurled
their cloths
their thighs glistening like golden knives
ready for the plunging,
for the plentiful loving time.
To whom shall I turn
to what shall I tell my woes ?
My kinsmen, the desert tree
denied us sustenance
long before the drought.
To whom shall I turn
to whom shall I tell my woes?
Some say tell the mother goat
she too is my kinswoman
elemental sister of your clan
But I cannot tell the mother goat
for she is not here.

That night he came home, he came unto me
at the cold hour of the night
Smelling of corn wine in the dawn dew.
He stretched his hand and covered my forehead.
There was a moon beam sparking rays in particles.
The drummer boys had got themselves a goat.
The din was high in the wail of the harvest moon.
The flood was up gurgling through the fields
Birth waters swimming in floods of new blood.
He whispered my name in far echo
Sky-wailing into a million sounds
across my shores. His voice still bore
the sadness of the wanderer
To wail and die in a soft lonely echo
That echo I heard long ago
In the fall of night over my river,
In the distant rustle of reeds
At growth in the strength of my river.
Once upon an evening I heard it
Strung clear as the gong of the drummer boys
Bright burnished like the glint edge of
the paschal knife, ready anxious to cut
My cords and enter into my fields.
I was still a dream then
Carried by the flimsy whiffs
Of sweet scents borne aloft on the vision
Of my coming flood
That will bear me slowly and gently
Into his world of smiles and smells.
He was not very gentle with me
But I did not complain. The thrust
was hard and angry, severing the tiny cord
Shattering the closed gates of raffia
Gathering at its eye the reeds to feed my fishes.
My flood had not risen.

The canoe carried on the strength
Of his man rowed steep down my river
into a tumultuous eternity
Of green hills and mountains
That reeled and rolled to the river shore
To clasp and bear me away.

Then the floodgates opened
for justice to cleanse to purify
My evening of awakening
In the turbulence of his triumph
Into the bright evening of my rebirth.
The birth was tedious
The pangs were bitter
Into the bright evening I rushed
Crying I have found him I have found him.
He stood there rustling in the wind
The desire to go was written large upon his forehead.
I was not ready for his coming
I was not ready for his loneliness,
for his sad solitude against the rustling wind.
I was not ready for his entrance
Into my fields and shores of my river.
The entrance of raffia was closed
closed against his lonely solitude.

He stood beneath my entrance
In his approach I knew the steps he took
Like the departing Lazarus
Marching toward his grave.
I was not ready.
The flood was gurgling at his estuary
swimming within me birth waters
warmed by his coming. He was silent
mute against the rushing of the wind
to cry and die for his homeland.
My flood had not risen then.
Across my vastness he marched into the wind
his arms folded upon his chest,
his eyes searching for the gates
that will open his amulets
to snatch and wear his talisman of hope.
He marched into the wind
howling through door posts
to catch the boatman at the dawn point.
to ferry him across my river.
But I was not ready.

My hands stretched to cover his
in the darkness, to cover his eyes
in the agony of his solitude
to call him names I knew
to put the dressing from my womb
upon his cudgel scars,
to hold his hand in the clasp of nightfall.
He was mute; the wind had stopped rustling
He was erect like the totem pole of his household
He burned and blazed for an ending
Then I was ready. As he pierced my agony
with his cry, my river burst into flood.
My shores reeled and rolled
to the world's end, where they say
at the world's end the graves are green.

I.

Dzogbese Lisa has treated me thus
It has led me among the sharps of the forest
Returning is not possible
And going forward is a great difficulty
The affairs of this world are like the chameleon feces
Into which I have stepped
When I clean it cannot go.1

I am on the world's extreme corner,
I am not sitting in the row with the eminent
But those who are lucky
Sit in the middle and forget
I am on the world's extreme corner
I can only go beyond and forget.

My people, I have been somewhere
If I turn here, the rain beats me
If I turn there the sun burns me
The firewood of this world
Is for only those who can take heart
That is why not all can gather it.
The world is not good for anybody
But you are so happy with your fate;
Alas! The travelers are back
All covered with debt.

II.

Something has happened to me
The things so great that I cannot weep;
I have no sons to fire the gun when I die
And no daughters to wail when I close my mouth
I have wandered on the wilderness
The great wilderness men call life
The rain has beaten me,
And the sharp stumps cut as keen as knives
I shall go beyond and rest.
I have no kin and no brother,
Death has made war upon our house;

And Kpeti's great household is no more,
Only the broken fence stands;
And those who dared not look in his face
Have come out as men.
How well their pride is with them.
Let those gone before take note
They have treated their offspring badly.
What is the wailing for?
Somebody is dead. Agosu himself
Alas! A snake has bitten me
My right arm is broken,
And the tree on which I lean is fallen.

Agosi if you go tell them,
Tell Nyidevu, Kpeti, and Kove
That they have done us evil;
Tell them their house is falling
And the trees in the fence
Have been eaten by termites;
That the martels curse them.
Ask them why they idle there
While we suffer, and eat sand.
And the crow and the vulture
Hover always above our broken fences
And strangers walk over our portion.

 Is there here
just hanging down,
will ever bring me fame.
I know, solo and roped between
Nothin very bad happen to me lately.
terms o' your bafflin odd sobriety.
Sober as man can get, no girls, no telephones,
what could happen bad to Mr Bones?

in a modesty of death I join my father
who dared so long agone leave me.
A bullet on a concrete stoop
close by a smothering southern sea
spreadeagled on an island, by my knee.

your left foot by my right foot,
shoulder to shoulder, all that jazz,
arm in arm, by the beautiful sea,
hum a little, Mr Bones.

He can say it was a painting
He can say we were the painting
And that we only happen to ourselves

We can say we kept things running
by distracting ourselves 
from the hideous truth 

That we were broken
That we lingered near a broken factory
That we had broken

We can say that the disappointment 
of slicing into a leek 
and not finding the requisite layers
but a thick white inedible core 
is not the disappointment 
of approaching a sleeping animal 
only to learn that it is dead
but it does nudge one slightly 
further into despair 

We said despair 
We meant the strings of impossible 
instruments that they made 
in the factory
That we had seen
That were broken
That there were different paintings
That could be played as songs

We had seen other things
That we had seen
That had come unstrung
and blown between adjacent bridges
whose river had presented us a city
That was broken
That we had been
That we were broken
That was our city
This was our city
that was a song replaying itself in the dark

I guess it's too late to live on the farm

I guess it's too late to enter the darkened room in which a single light 
illuminated the artist stripped from the waist down, smeared with 
blood, stretched and bound to the table

I guess it's too late to inhabit a glass-fronted, white, box-like room, 
dressed in white, against which the menstrual blood was visible

I guess it's too late to start farming

I guess it's too late to start struggling to remain standing in a 
transparent plastic cubicle filled with wet clay, repeatedly slipping and 
falling

I guess it's too late to buy 60,000 acres in Marfa

I guess it's too late to begin appearing on the subway in stinking 
clothes during rush hour with balloons attached to her ears, nose, hair 
and teeth

I guess we'll never have an orgiastic Happening

I guess we're too old to carry out maintenance activities in public 
spaces, during public hours

I guess we couldn't afford to simulate masturbation while President 
Josip Broz Tito's motorcade drove by below

I guess we're not suited to "I am awake in the place where women die"

I guess we'll never have a self-inflicted wound in front of an audience now

crotch removed, and a machine gun slung over her shoulder is not in 
the cards now

I guess Clive wouldn't make a good photographic montage in which 
their male and female faces became almost indistinguishable

I guess I can't expect we'll ever have a selection of photographs derived 
from images produced by the beauty industry now

I guess I'll have to give up all my dreams of being seen, clothed and 
unclothed, being systematically measured by two male 'researchers' 
who record her measurements on a chart and compare them with a set 
of 'normal' measurements

I guess I'll never be waiting for my body to break down, to get ugly

We couldn't get tied together by our hair anyways though Allen 
Ginsberg got one late in life

Maybe someday I'll have the foreshortened barrel of a gun pointing 
toward the viewer

I guess joining our hands around the base's perimeter fence into which 
they weave strands of wool is really out

Feeding the pigs and the chickens, walking between miles of rows of crops

I guess examining women's working conditions is just too difficult

We'll never have a, never-really-a-collective, a group of women who 
came together to work on a public mural

Too much work and still to be poets

Who are the simultaneously-the-beneficiary-of-our-cultural-heritage-
and-a-victim-of-it-poets

Was there ever a poet who had a self-sufficient loss of certainty

And Wendell Berry has raised large-scale spirals of rusted industrial 
materials in incongruous natural and commercial spaces

Faulkner may have spent three days in a gallery with a coyote, a little

And Robert Frost asked a friend to shoot him at close range with a .22 
caliber rifle

And someone told me Samuel Beckett lay hidden under a gallery-wide 
ramp, masturbating while vocalizing into a loudspeaker his fantasies 
about the visitors walking above him

Very few poets are really going to the library carrying a concealed tape 
recording of loud belches

If William Carlos Williams could be a doctor and Charlie Vermont too, 
If Yves Klein could be an artist, and Jackson Pollock too,

Why not a poet who was also dying of lymphoma and making a series of 
life size photographs, self-portrait watercolors, medical object-sculptures 
and collages made with the hair she lost during chemotherapy

Of course there was Brook Farm
And Virgil raised bees
Perhaps some poets of the past were overseers of the meticulous
chronicle of the feeding and
I guess poets tend to live more momentarily 
Than life in her body as the object of her own sculpting activity would allow 
You could never leave the structures made of wood, rope and concrete 
blocks assembled to form
Or to go to a lecture by Emerson in Concord 
I don't want to be continuously scrubbing the flesh off of cow bones 
with a cleaning brush but
I should never have tried to rise out of the proletariat 
Unless I can convince myself as Satan argues with Eve 
That we are among a proletariat of poets of all the classes 
Each ill-paid and surviving on nothing 
Or on as little as one needs to survive 
Steadfast as any person's glottis, photographed with a laryngoscope, 
speaking the following
a long time after silence"
Tenants of a vision we rent out endlessly

In green water I saw your eye and in it I saw that Arabian palace 
filled with birds and broken glass.
and fill myself with memories of psalms. 
A green fish emerges from seaweed as seaweed from a wave

My sun-baked body at the edge,
wind in my lungs, its whistle,
my torn world, my grief,
my soggy passport, my shell with no pearl,
you lift them, delicate cloud, into a liquid world.

Last night I dreamed of my father's flabby body and of my blue 
resolve to run away, to find a way, I dreamed of your eye
the imaginary line that falls across the earth:

Waking up, we are swallowed by wakefulness.
The house swallows us in its terrible thirst. The routine of taking our children
to school swallows us

There was something to that dream. You know it. A direction. A way.

Give me your premonitions, give me your book, give me your prodigious memory, 
give me the blue gaze from your dark eye, give me the devotion of your sleeping birds.

Sometimes the way is a fire 
through which the circus tiger
and with the endless continuity of this ineluctably feral world.

I need help with long term hope
I need help with the dawn
of war and achieving
my new year's resolutions

This praise song
and the problem of pornography
structures this praise song
as speaking placement

I need help moving my chickens
I need help with girl problem
my dog, like, keeps marking the wrong areas?

and my breasts
this most pressing issue
like choosing between best friends
a distance problem involving constant
acceleration and tethering glitches

The party's all "descendant selectors, please!"
and me I'm in my handspring visor
and my bird plucking problem

I need help with a bat script for parsing
I need help with pricing with naming this
praise song I said
I seriously need help with the whole set up ASAP!

so it's
40.08 /100.09 (grams of molecular mass of calcium carbonate) =
moles of calcium

then
(moles of Calcium x .1973ml (convert grams to ml)) / 0.05

I got 1.580 ml
is that right?

In our house we live with Arlene. My little sister has a plan.
Arlene better than anyone; she knows me better. Esme says 
over to the window where the black mould has made 
a map of Australia. Australia gives me trouble breathing,
in my chest, my whole life in there twisted up like a snake. 
It could bite me or her. She puts a hand on my breastbone. 
of this insomniac light. I lie awake watching over my sisters 
and I listen to them breathe. Esme whispers that I should 
wake her if I need to. I say I will, but I never do. Even when 
down at them, the night pouring from my hands. Esme has 
and makes buttermilk pancakes using normal milk soured 
with lemon juice. She tries things out. Arlene tells us 
does what she likes. She grates apple for a new recipe and 
serving up apple pancakes with banana and maple syrup
and she says, You are a whole person. A row of mornings fan out.
And the pancakes are sweet and slightly gummy with a salt edge.

Stay, I said
to the cut flowers.
They bowed
their heads lower.

Stay, I said to the spider,
who fled.

Stay, leaf.
It reddened,
embarrassed for me and itself.

Stay, I said to my body.
It sat as a dog does,
obedient for a moment,
soon starting to tremble.

Stay, to the earth
of riverine valley meadows,
of fossiled escarpments,
of limestone and sandstone.
It looked back
with a changing expression, in silence.

Stay, I said to my loves.
Each answered,
Always.

1 
1

Sometime after I had entered
people prefer to allude to in others
but not in themselves, in the middle of the night
the phone rang. It rang and rang
as though the world needed me,
though really it was the reverse.

the ring. It had
pained embarrassment.

When I picked it up, the line was dead.
Or was the phone working and the caller dead?
Or was it not the phone, but the door perhaps?

2 
2

My mother and father stood in the cold
on the front steps. My mother stared at me,
a daughter, a fellow female.
You never think of us, she said.

We read your books when they reach heaven.
And they pointed to my dead sister, a complete stranger,

After which they vanished, like Mormon missionaries.

3 
3

The street was white again,
all the bushes covered with heavy snow
and the trees glittering, encased with ice.

I lay in the dark, waiting for the night to end.
It seemed the longest night I had ever known,
longer than the night I was born.

I write about you all the time, I said aloud.

4 
4

Outside the street was silent.
The receiver lay on its side among the tangled sheets,
its peevish throbbing had ceased some hours before.

I left it as it was;
its long cord drifting under the furniture.

I watched the snow falling,
not so much obscuring things
as making them seem larger than they were.

Who would call in the middle of the night?
Trouble calls, despair calls.
Joy is sleeping like a baby.
Knock me or nothing, the things of this world
ring in me, shrill-gorged and shrewish,

clicking their charms and their chains and their spouts.
Let them. Let the fans whirr.

All the similar virgins must have emptied
their flimsy pockets, and I

was empty enough,
sugared and stretched on the unmown lawn,

dumb as the frost-pink tongues
of the unpruned roses.

When you put your arms around me in that moment,
when you pulled me to you and leaned

back, when you lifted me
just a few inches, when you shook me

hard then, had you ever heard
such emptiness?

I had room for every girl's locket,
every last dime and pocketknife.

why rattle only the world

you placed in me? Won't you clutter the unkissed,
idiot stars? They blink and blink

like quiet shepherds,
like brides-about-your-neck.

Call them out of that quietness.
Knock them in their nothing, against their empty enamel,

against the dark that has no way to hold them
and no appetite.

Call in the dead to touch them.
Let them slip on their own chinks of light.

Again this morning my eyes woke up too close
to your eyes,

their almost green orbs
too heavy-lidded to really look back.

To wake up next to you
is ordinary. I do not even need to look at you

to see you.
But I do look. So when you come to me

in your opulent sadness, I see
you do not want me

to unbutton you
so I cannot do the one thing

I can do.
Now it is almost one a.m. I am still at my desk

and you are upstairs at your desk a staircase
away from me. Already it is years

of you a staircase
away from me. To be near you

and not near you
is ordinary.

You
are ordinary.

Still, how many afternoons have I spent
peeling blue paint from

our porch steps, peering above
hedgerows, the few parked cars for the first

glimpse of you. How many hours under
the overgrown, pink Camillas, thinking

the color was wrong for you, thinking
you'd appear

after my next
blink.

Soon you'll come down the stairs
to tell me something. And I'll say,

okay. Okay. I'll say it
like that, say it just like

that, I'll go on being
your never-enough.

It's not the best in you
I long for. It's when you're noteless,

numb at the ends of my fingers, all is
all. I say it is.

I would drive the pre-dawn dark to stake
my spot to fish for dinner, to numb my hands in the ice
bucket, to pluck, from the neat stack, a herring,
to fit the skullcap and pierce the eye with a toothpick,
the body double-hooked, my fingertips glimmering
with the scales of the dead while the line whined free
from the reel, and the bait arced out over the tidal current

where I had become a man
suddenly concerned only with money, for there were mouths

The eddy swirled, kept my line taut, my
whole body taut though a man a few down the row
laughed, sitting back on his bucket while he pulled in more fish
than he could take.

I hated the other men, hated the ones who caught nothing,
who crossed lines or hooked gulls, who plucked even birds from the sky
and slowly drew them in while they struggled and looked away, even,
finally, in the hands of the man who only wanted them free.

I climbed the breakwater and fished and spoke to no one.

I baited my line and thought of a woman
who would carry my body over the threshold
of our small white house simply with her eyes
because I had brought something home,
for her, for us, our boys at my side

(Now to sift the facts for truth):

and no other place to be.

Zigging, mid-
his cane sweeping
over

broken asphalt,
like a sapper or
an open skiff on back-splashing seas. For a few
unclear

if he gets
the risk,
as yellow cabs swoop down and flock at the light.
Then, safe
home

on the other
side. And I
for one cannot take my eyes off him as he pivots,
compassing
north.

truly clear.
Now he jams himself at pace between a giant planter
and cross-braced
scaffold

newly set up
at Finnegans.
And wham. The guy is smack on his ass, un-staring up
to heaven,
stunned.

Damn,
I think, what
want

you back
(though that
once ate up years of my life and left me blown like an artery
after too many
bypasses),

nor does it
compare to
probably
lose.

as if a hammer
dropped from a sill and laid him out cold. That scaffold
just appeared there
overnight.

And for all
my hard-won bile
to think I
am.

He forgets that he used to call me mariconcito-
 that I harbored years of hatred toward him
 while hoping to find my real father. My
 childhood memories of him reminding me
 I was my mother's son, not his. I tried
 to poison him once and scattered sharp nails
 inside the shoes in his closet. By the time one
 of his sons died of AIDS I was already lost
 in contempt for the man I blamed for everything.
 There was the time I was in love and he met my
 boyfriend. Now he forgets to go to the bathroom
 or where he is but he still remembers Michael
 and asks about him. I help him walk slowly
 outdoors to step outside the prison cell that is
 the tiny apartment with no windows in which
 I grew up abused by both of them. He barely
 understands. His fate has been torture. I know
 that I cannot be his savior. I used to pray for
 him to die but here he is slowly fading. In his
 eyes I see that he learned to love me and wishes
 he could take it all back. He is unable to recall
 those drunken nights and hateful words. I should
 do the same. I left a long time ago but he still
 remains haunted by the little boy who wanted
 to belong. Like him, I want to forget that we
 made mistakes and caused so much pain. I need
 for both of us to remember how he taught me
 how to ride a bike and how to swim and told
 me, better late than never, that he loved me and
 was proud of all I had done. I have to help him
 settle into his favorite chair and let him know that
 I forgive him. There is a place somewhere where
 he will call me hijo and I will know him as my dad.

A lapwing somersaults spring
flips over winter and back.

After a fast walk up long hills, my limbs
bubbles into beck and clough to gill,
and held from hurtling by Scots pine
that brush a scrubby sky with cloud snow scutters,
I found a place to sit

And so, alone,
bring you here.

the need for which you perhaps first realized
when you saw the wrong kind of shadow 

and you wanted to step inside
and soap her up like you did in college when she said

in every way you could enjoy a person with soap.

shave her legs or wash herself anywhere.

that letting your husband see you pluck anything,
trim anything, apply medicine to anything,

is not as forbidding as it should be, despite the fact
that you have to put gloves on 

Downstairs, a large bathtub, kept, for some reason,
after remodeling. It is there that your bear will be grown,
by you, though you have no idea how. Probably wishing

is most of it; fertilizer, chunks of raw stew meat,
make up the rest. Then water.

You get an e-mail from a friend late at night 

when you have finished growing your bear. You could 
write a letter to her tonight, explaining how your life
was just so lacking in bear: 

clearly you have no possible way of supplying me with a bear
or any of the activities I might be able to enjoy 

It might just be best 
to keep the two worlds separate. 
Janet clearly prefers things to be comfortable
and unchallenging. Janet soaps herself up. Janet puts herself
to bed, and you just happen to be next to her. 

You go on your weekly bike ride with Mark and tell him

You think about how not all friends know
what each other sounds like when struggling and
breathing heavy. Past the age of college athletics,
look like, flushed, tired, showering, cold.

When everything finally has been wrecked and further shipwrecked,
When their most ardent dream has been made hollow and unrecognizable,
They will feel inside their limbs the missing shade of blue that lingers
Against hills in the cooler hours before dark, and the moss at the foot of the forest
When green starts to leave it. What they take into their privacy (half of his embrace,
Her violence at play) are shadows of acts which have no farewells in them.
Moons unearth them. And when, in their separate dwellings, their bodies
Feel the next season come, they no longer have anyone to whom
To tell it. Clouds of reverie pass outside the window and a strange emptiness
Peers back in. If they love, it is solely to be adored, it is to scatter and gather
Themselves like hard seeds in a field made fallow by a fire someone years ago set.
In the quiet woods, from the highest trees, there is always something
Weightless falling; and he, who must realize that certain losses are irreparable,
Tells himself at night, before the darkest mirror, that vision keeps him whole.

On the verge of warm and simple sleep they tell themselves certain loves
Are like sheets of dark water, or ice forests, or husks of ships. To stop a thing
They may have caused. Quiet falls around them. And when she reaches
For him the air greens like underwater light and the well-waters drop.
They will see again the shadows of insects.
They will touch the bark and feel each age of the tree fly undisturbed
Into them. If what is no longer present in them cannot be restored,
It can at least be offered. Through long bewildered dusks, stalks grow;
Rains fill and pass out of clouds; animals hover at the edges of fields
With eyes like black pools. For nothing cannot be transformed;
Pleasure and failure feed each other daily. Do not think any breeze,
Any grain of light, shall be withheld. All the stars will sail out for them.

I have been taught never to brag but now
I cannot help it: I keep
a beautiful garden, all abundance,
indiscriminate, pulling itself
from the stubborn earth: does it offend you
to watch me working in it,
touching my hands to the greening tips or
tearing the yellow stalks back, so wild
the living and the dead both
snap off in my hands?
The neighbor with his stuttering
fingers, the neighbor with his broken
love: each comes up my drive
to receive his pitying,
accustomed consolations, watches me
work in silence awhile, rises in anger,
walks back. Does it offend them to watch me
not mourning with them but working
fitfully, fruitlessly, working
the way the bees work, which is to say
by instinct alone, which looks like pleasure?
I can stand for hours among the sweet
narcissus, silent as a point of bone.
I can wait longer than sadness. I can wait longer
than your grief. It is such a small thing
to be proud of, a garden. Today
there were scrub jays, quail,
a woodpecker knocking at the white-
scratching under the barberry: is it
indiscriminate? Should it shrink back, wither,
and expurgate? Should I, too, not be loved?
It is only a little time, a little space.
Why not watch the grasses take up their colors in a rush
like a stream of kerosene being lit?
If I could not have made this garden beautiful
nor care for each the same, inflamed way.
I would have to stay only like the bees,
beyond consciousness, beyond
self-reproach, fingers dug down hard
into stone, and growing nothing.
There is no end to ego,
with its museum of disappointments.
I want to take my neighbors into the garden
and show them: Here is consolation.
Here is your pity. Look how much seed it drops
around the sparrows as they fight.
It lives alongside their misery.
It glows each evening with a violent light.

 cassette bootleg, howling tin sound with
 unreleased, recorded not by some venerable
 Mississippi blues curmudgeon
 whose name, artfully dropped here,
 would evoke afternoons porch-sitting
 with magnolia wine and box-string guitar,
 or might bestow upon me
 some sorely lacking hipster bonafides.
 since I am talking here
 about a nearly unlistenable cover,
 the monophonic noise and mid-range screech
 of The Knack, live in Hollywood,
 before a packed house at the Troubador,
 July 1979. So what if I was twelve?
 learning how to get in the front door first.
 Which was the vaguest country,
 women, or the blues? I did not know.
 I still might not. I only knew
 what I was learning: that a song
 could actually sound like sweat;
 that Ray Manzarek, gangly Ray best known
 as the piano-playing witness to greatness,
 had dropped by to sit in,
 it was a benediction, as if to say, Hey,
these guys are all right, forgive them
 their sins of leather tie and Beatle boot.
 So I want to say thank you
 to whatever thought to tape that show,
 because it taught me that I wanted a forever
 girl like Sharona, who,
 as the 45-rpm picture sleeve promised,
 played the coolest records
 for her slumber-partying girlfriends,
 who all looked like the camisoled girls
 in the Runaways or the equally fated Go-Gos.
 But I am getting ahead of myself, since,
 as Leonard Cohen says, everybody knows
 how this story ends. I have everything
 The Knack ever recorded, including
 this version of Back Door Man,
 which tells me everything that was wrong
 with 1979, and later, everything wrong with me.
 How does the show end? Listen
 to the cassette, a moment in unsteady time,
 the Zapruder film of the skinny tie era.
 For the band, you know how it ends
 already: rehab, divorce, rehab, forgiveness,
 comeback tour, state fair nostalgia;
 they grow up, which reminds me
My Sharona, that set-closing number,
 may be the saddest story I know.
My mother was married by the water. 
She wore a gray coat and a winter rose.

She said her vows beside a cold seam of the Irish coast.

She said her vows near the shore where
the emigrants set down their consonantal n:

on afternoon, on the end of everything, at the start of ever.

Yellow vestments took in light.
A chalice hid underneath its veil.

Her hands were full of calla and cold-weather lilies.

The mail packet dropped anchor.
A black-headed gull swerved across the harbor.

Icy promises rose beside a crosshatch of ocean and horizon.

I am waiting for the words of the service. I am waiting for 
keep thee only and all my earthly. 

Re-reading him in Bouchon
past noon, it is mobbed midtown,
like an ant farm seen through painkillers.

capitalism, communism, feminism,
this lust to liberate.
Che should have stayed in medicine.

to marry and get to the alimony,
before they hit thirty. The men,
heads skinned like Lager inmates,
know only the revolutions

in diets and spinning classes.
Still, one table away,
these two, with gnarled empretzled hands,
seem unhappy in the old way.

Instead of wishing the stain would vanish?

All this foolishness, all the anguish?

All these ravages with famished relish?

Were all slicked up in something lavish?

Why so squeamish? Why make a fetish
Out of everything you must relinquish?

What would you be without this gibberish?

Were to replenish your resolve to vanquish
Every vain wish before you vanish?

He fancies his chances are good with her, 
unaware that in the years since the war 

a bark-colored moth, its wings crinkled 
like crepe paper, a moth affixed high 

on the kitchen wall, frozen for days where 
it will likely die in noble clinging mode

just under the cobwebby heating vent, 
is to confirm your need for more friends 

and a greater daily quota of sunlight. 

drinking and then to liken those 
hopes to fields of undulating grain, 

alfalfa perhaps, is to wish C. hip deep 
in acres of unscythed denial. The blind 

her disability becoming an issue. L. said he felt 

radiating in all directions, like some incipient 

If mother earth only knew how much we 
loved one another she would creak, shudder, 

and split like a macheted melon, releasing 
the fiery ball of molten hope at her core.

Someday compassion would demand
I set myself free of my desire to recreate
strangle lovers with words, forcing them
to confess for me and take the blame.
Today was that day: I tossed them, sheet
by sheet on the patio and gathered them
into a pyre. I wanted to let them go
in a blaze, tiny white dwarfs imploding
beside the azaleas and ficus bushes,
let them crackle, burst like winged seeds,
a thousand gray butterflies in the wind.
Today was that day, but it rained, kept 
knocking on doors, wetting windows
into mirrors reflecting me in the oaks.
The garden walls and stones swelling
into ghostlier shades of themselves,
the wind chimes giggling in the storm,
a coffee cup left overflowing with rain.
Instead of burning, my pages turned
into water lilies floating over puddles,
then tiny white cliffs as the sun set,
finally drying all night under the moon
the rain would not let their lives burn.

 like a full moon casting a foggy halo
 in the frigid air last night, the bare oaks
 branching into the sky like nerve endings
 inches away from the frozen stars,
 the pink gables of your Victorian home
 protesting yet another winter for you
 captive in Ann Arbor as you practice
 your red-velvet shoes to conga beats
and bongo taps taking your body, but
not your life, from the snow mantling
your windows outside, 1,600 miles
you made, the slice of homemade flan
floating in burnt sugar like the stories
no matter how many times you travel
through time back to Havana to steal
every memory ever stolen from you.

wanting only to imagine faces for names
chiseled on the graves of your family
at Guanabacoa, walk on Calle Aguacate
and pretend to meet the grandfather
you never met at his lace shop for lunch,
or pray the Kaddish like your mother
at the synagogue in El Vedado, stand
on the steps there like you once did
I confess I pitied you, still trying to reach
that unreachable island within the island
you still call home. I thought I was done
with Cuba, tired of filling in the blanks,
just once more, walk the sugarcane fields
my father once cut, drive down the road
where my mother once peddled guavas
to pay for textbooks, sit on the porch
last night when you asked me: Would you
move to Cuba? Would you die there?

My house disgusted me, so I slept in a tent.
My tent disgusted me, so I slept in the grass. The grass disgusted me,
so I slept in my body, which I strung like a hammock from two ropes.
My body disgusted me, so I carved myself out of it.
My use of knives disgusted me because it was an act of violence.
as beautiful. My vanity disgusted me because I am a scholar.
My scholarship disgusted me because knowledge is empty.
My emptiness disgusted me because I wanted to be whole.
My wholeness would have disgusted me because to be whole
is to be smug. Still, I tried to understand wholeness
as the inclusiveness of all activities: I walked out into the yard,
trying to vomit and drink milk simultaneously. I tried to sleep
while smoking a cigar. I have enough regrets to crack all the plumbing.

As phantoms direct life from the shadows,
 I leaned on something,
 My father on the porch with his crosswords said,
 this must be what it feels like to be dead;
 When I returned from the dead there was no one to greet me,
 I wander the ruins the way my tongue
 wanders my missing teeth,
 the bricks and mortar of Deep Deuce
 rotted like molars in an ancient mouth;
 The astrologer counseled patience
 and creative imaging:
an object that symbolizes the accursed influence. Picture yourself throwing 
it into a furnace.
the person who is responsible for the curse. Imagine one end of a rope
is tied around your waist and the other around that person. Picture yourself cutting
twice a day for eleven days . . .
 You visualize her green boots inside the furnace . . .
 her perfect and corruptible body on a tray sliding into fire;
 Then you see yourself cutting the rope that ties you together with a saw;
 and I jump in after her.

 from God,
through the medium of the Angels, and departed saints, as forewarnings to stir up and prepare the mind for the scenes ahead. 
From this I infer some trouble is at hand,
 The sounds came in waves, higher
 and higher, at the top of it
 Now what you call your great disappointment,
 When I heard (though not always
 Yet if you tell me they are only 
 my dear dead returning,
 I would not disbelieve you.
 2.
 It is an odd sort of fortune to have lived an adventurous life.
 In my disgust, I left school and devoted
 all my blighted spirit to minstrelsy;
 I had no natural aptness for the banjo,
 such a remarkable gift few ever saw.
 The first part of our performances
 and by practicing to knock spin and toss the tambourine
 back in my room,
 Besides my Highland Fling, I took the principal lady parts
 in the negro ballets;
 a planter in one of the Southern States insisted on purchasing me, 
 until the door-tender kicked that planter down the stairs.
 Old Ephraim was one of the most comical specimens 
 of the negro species,
 the blackest face, largest mouth, whitest teeth;
 What could he do?
 Why, he could fetch water, black our boots, take care of our baggage.
 My father said of Howie Gray
 who worked beside him every day at the South Station PO
 and put both his sons through college, 
 My father meant that as a compliment.
 There were tears in his eyes when Howie Gray died.
 3.
It hath been thought that the dying speeches of such as have been executed among us
might be of singular use to correct the crimes wherein too many do live
 Now what you call your Great Awakening, 
 I call Much Ado, 
 But when did I become someone on whom
 everything is lost?
 Where I checked hats, 
 My earnest offers to return the $1.00 gratuity 
 I thought I was boyish. 
 It availed me nothing.

 Will be buried in the clay of the racetrack where he fell,
 As a lesson for all of us. Sad, waggish Bing,
 Pulled on the reins until the thoroughbred, straining
 Over the finish line first, collapsed, heart attack.
 I loved you like a guitar string breaking
 Something like that . . . I suppose I must have
 Been thinking of you and your complex and beautiful band,
 Except the image demands I hold the guitar,
 If not you, and the broken string, as
 Over and over loudspeakers call riders to the starting gate.
 The track bartender and a teller, a sharpshooter and the chess master
 Wrestler, the petty con man and a cop, reprise their parts.
 The heist gang dons clown masks, and
 And the fortune in the suitcase just blows away.

Its fine 
incisors
grinding

my mother
fed my 
fledgling
carpentry
concern
into her
adding
machine

as if its 
hunger
could be
satisfied

costs and 
savings
spooling
to our 
wooden
kitchen
floor and 
pooling

amounting
to nothing

shavings.

Mossy and thumping, bare of logic, red:

The snack cakes of Smut Wonderland
turn Alice smaller than her dress. She stirs,
nude in the folds of so much baby blue. 

you were thinking with your other heart. 

I took in a dog the way some might take in

to stop, I fed it meat, its malady
recurrent and untreatable. I had 
to give it up, like some bum body part 

That dog: I called it Help, and I cried for it.

The word itself: prim, retired, its artifact 
her portrait above the fireplace, on her face 
the boredom she abhorred, then perfected, 
a revision, cigarette and brandy snifter 
painted, intolerably, out, to leave her this 
lesser gesture: What next? or shrugged Whatever.
From the waist down she was never there. 

to the peach farm or rather
the peach farm seems to be wanting me back
even though the work of picking, sorting,
the sticky perils and sudden swarms are done.
been on a peach farm, just glimpsed
from a car squat trees I assumed
were peach and knew a couple in school
who went off one summer, so they said, 
to work on a peach farm. She was pregnant,
of crushed lightbulbs and screws in paste.
for putting too much meat
on the sandwiches of his friends
selling caviar and she went home
I think to Scranton, two more versions
of never hearing from someone again.
one goes to the peach farm to avoid,
not just flight from quadratic equations,
waiting for the plumber,
Everyone wants to be part of some harvest
and stop coughing to death and cursing 
at nothing and waking up nowhere near
an orchard. Look at these baskets,
bashed about, nearly ruined with good employ.
you dream of angels, the one with the trumpet
and free subscriptions to the New Yorker
or the archer, the oink angel, angel
of ten dollar bills found in the dryer
or the one who welcomes you in work gloves

These, his last, 
Inexplicably and
Unavailable 

Cast a shadow on his prospects, and he sighed. 
Before all this, he 
Would have lit a pipe and 
In aromatic mauve tobacco...Shadows 
Baffled pleasantly 

Once a bear. 
He would have enjoyed a smoke with a bear. 
Hibernation is 

He would have enjoyed 
Some banter on, and amiable disputation of, 
His claim. Or
On night air, the fanfare above a curve, a star,
If suitably 

There will be no edges, but curves.
Clean lines pointing only forward.

History, with its hard spine & dog-eared
Corners, will be replaced with nuance,

Just like the dinosaurs gave way
To mounds and mounds of ice.

Women will still be women, but

Having outlived every threat, will gratify
Only the mind, which is where it will exist.

For kicks, we'll dance for ourselves
Before mirrors studded with golden bulbs.

But the word sun will have been re-assigned

To the Standard Uranium-Neutralizing device
Found in households and nursing homes.

And yes, we'll live to be much older, thanks
To popular consensus. Weightless, unhinged,

Eons from even our own moon, we'll drift
In the haze of space, which will be, once

And for all, scrutable and safe.

I. TO THE FATES

They cannot keep the peace
or their hands off each other,
breed not yet preach 
the old discredited creed.

Love is charity conceived 
as a coin dropped 
Reason not the need. 

Gluttony is no nicer than greed
or wrath, but lust
is our categorical must.
We have no choice but to breed.

 II. OLYMPIA
Olympia lies on her couch
with an insolent stare,
her hand hiding her crotch,
a flower in her hair.

She splits the lot of us with a sneer: 
we are either breeders or queer.
We will fight wars because of her.
She will root us on. We will win.

The face in the mirror is not brave,
but we crave contact with her skin
and the jewel in the mouth of her cave.
She tempts like a sin

and under her spell we fall
into a deep enchanted sleep,
and wake up ready to make the leap,
ready to heed her call,

on streets less friendly than wilderness,
a platoon of ex-pals in Manhattan.
Olympia tempts like a sin,

but then sends us home to the wife,
commands us to resume the life
we had planned to give up in her honor:
the life of a dutiful husband, a modest success

in his profession, impressive 
in credentials, in mood depressive

And Olympia lies on her couch,
with her insolent stare,
her hand hiding her crotch,
a flower in her hair.

it was her dusty shoes cut open at the top that told.
with a lift to her chin, while I struggled to teach her anything. 
Consider this a prayer, a foolish one.

Cutlery clatters into the sink. 
But always the characters, uniquely themselves,
only some decades older. They search
for their coats. You were, she reminds him,
our resident nomad, come to pitch your tent 
here, sidewalks for sand, unaccustomed taboos: 
Morningside Heights, one of your lives.
visit the nephew, the namesake in Boston
who drives a cab, sends a pittance each month 
He explains how it works, this drip feed
of cash to Sudan from the United States: 
in tidy shrines, scrum of sloughed coats. 
In the kitchen friends wash up. Sound
of laughter. Sound of water flowing
out of a tap. Yes, she replies, shocked
by the twinge, then ache, of remorse.
she knows later. Right now, vague shame. 
End of March. Maybe April. Street trees
are trying to bloom. The irretrievable
sits on the table, white as a plate. He holds her
her coat.

my eye drinks itself, 
the little Buddha there,
Chinese grove god
in exchange for a ladleful of Hulstkamp,
please!

Never painted anything 
in frost-white or ice-skater blue 
or that Irish green 
always my own monotone,
not pleasant
to pursue that path so clearly.

I pick up the slate-pencil and certain things appear 
on paper or canvas
but I draw the line at homage under ornamental plants,
something for the boardroom!

...Creaking, 
little sheep squeaking, chromotypes
for the grandchildren 
(same idiots!) 
hits the spot, 
midpoint of colors, 
my shadow brown, 

 
The blocked chimney smokes 
the tree stumps are wet,
enough characters, 
the world is overpopulated as it is,
plentiful peach-fall, four rosebuds
asperged,
set to tread the boards
by this hand,
grown wrinkled
and with sluggish veins!

All the Juliets and Ophelias, 
all the soft mouths, the sighs
the original actresses long since turned to smoke,
Ariel too, away with the elements.

The age takes off its frockcoat. 
These lousy skulls of lords, 
their trains of thought
my lords makers of history
all of them crowned and sceptered illiterates,
yes, like so many bats or kites!

Sir Goon wrote to me lately: 
could only be mine,
of centuries

the booty never brought to light, 
the booths, the scaffolds, the cymbals 
gaps? Gap teeth maybe, 
but the great monkey jaws
would grind on
the tree stumps are wet
and the butler snores in porter dreams.

A day without tears is a rare occurrence
practically an episode

when men still wore starched collars,
and stuffed cotton wool between their toes
but you would see faces that were worth a second look
those were years when something whispered

Left the house shattered, it hurt so bad,
so many years as a man, compromise,
in spite of partial success in intellectual tussle
he was never anyone of Olympian allure.

He walked slowly through the dreamscape
of the late autumn day, barely distinguishable
from early spring, with young willows
and a patch of waste ground where blue jays screamed.

Dreamy exposure to phenomena
that to nature in its administration

so he drank his gin and accepted a dish
of sausage soup, free on Thursdays
with a beverage and so found the Olympian balance
of sorrow and pleasure.

 
He had been reading on the park bench
and stared into the gray of the last roses,
there were no titans, just shrubs
thinned out by fall.

He put down his book. It was a day like any other
and the people were like all people everywhere,
that was how it would always be, at least
this mixture of death and laughter would persist.

A scent is enough to change things,
even small flowers stand in some relation to a cedar of Lebanon,
then he walked on and saw the windows of the furriers
were full of warm things for the winter ahead.

 
All very well, a gin and a few minutes
in the park at noon, with the sun shining,
but what when the landlord comes by, there are problems

Shattered: how far are you allowed to push your I,
and see peculiar things as somehow symptomatic?
as far as a Ludwig Richter canvas?

Shattered: no one knows. Shattered and you turn
your little experiment with destiny will end
gloriously and forever, but quite alone.

Damned evergreens! Vinyl whines!
left the house and closed his reverie.

After it came in like a dark bird
Out of the snow, barely whistling
The notes father, mother, child,
It was hard to say what made us happiest.
Seeing the branches where it had learned
To stir the air? The air that opened
Without fear? Just the branches
And us in a room of wild things?
Like a shapeless flame, it flew
A dozen times around the room.
And, in a wink, a dozen more.
Into the wall, the window, the door.
You said the world turns to parts.
You said the parts are cunning spheres.
You said you always love the face of sin.
Outside the snow deepened
With heaves of discontent.
Inside, the tremor of our life
Flew in and in and in.

Just for a couple of years, we said, a dozen years back.
Nothing is more permanent than the temporary.

When we crossed the water, we only brought what we could carry,
But there are always boxes that you never do unpack.
Nothing is more permanent than the temporary.

Nostalgia and tear gas have the same acrid smack.

Stuff receipts in envelopes, file papers in a stack.
Nothing is more permanent than the temporary.

We left our wedding china behind, afraid that it might crack.
But nothing is more permanent than the temporary.

The lousy job my father lands
stack pigs in blankets on a plate.

I gobble these puffed-up weenie geniuses

Dad chews his slowly with a pint of gin,

I want to leave this place
unremembered.
The gas stove is leaking
and the door of the refrigerator
stained with rust.
The mugs are ugly
and there are only two forks.
The walls are black
and soft, the bed a balloon
of night-clothing.
The stairwell sloped

There are big windows
with blind-slats dusty
and gray. Street life 
goes all night and at dawn
freedmen shout and 
laugh outside the kitchen.

Where does life begin and end?
In the lamb or the cotton?
My pillow is my friend.

I have never arrived
into a new life yet.

Have you?

Do you find the squeak
of boots on snow

excruciating?

Have you heard people

when they accomplished
a great feat?

I have, often.
But rarely. 

Possibility
is one of the elements.
It keeps things going.

The ferry
with its ratty engine
and exactitude at chugging
into blocks and chains.

Returning as ever
under a salty rain.

Slave up, slave down. 

Then came the darker sooner,
came the later lower.
We were no longer a sweeter-here
happily-ever-after. We were after ever.
We were farther and further.
More was the word we used for harder.
Lost was our standard-bearer.
Our gods were fallen faster,
and fallen larger.
The day was duller, duller
was disaster. Our charge was error.
Instead of leader we had louder,
instead of lover, never. And over this river

Dead to the world I have failed you
Forgive me, traveller.
Thirsty, I was no fountain
Hungry, I was not bread
Tired, I was no pillow
Forgive my unwritten poems:
the many I have frozen with irony
the many I have trampled with anger
the many I have rejected in self-defence
the many I have ignored in fear
unaware, blind or fearful
I ignored them.
They clamoured everywhere
those unwritten poems.
They sought me out day and night
and I turned them away.
Forgive me the colours
they might have worn
Forgive me their eclipsed faces
They dared not venture from
the unwritten lines.
Under each inert hour of my silence
died a poem, unheeded

1
Adrift in the middle of my years, I sit in a corner and drink. I eavesdrop
a tableful of girls romancing their cell phones, workshopping
I listen like a thief in case the women know the score.
But I never could tell. At fulltime I walk home like a motherless child.
2
but back in my room I ring like a singing bowl,
empty and unable to stop.
the twenty-seven strains of despair. And your lovely hair has fallen.
The moon at my window is a rusted shot, caught in its corrupt trajectory down.
3
while beyond me the world peters and my friend fights beautifully

Past the fountain out of repair
And the boarded diner

A small studio

Where old clothes have remained

Side by side
With random notes and sketches

When someone close to you
Has a different idea of what you represent

He insisted

There were other misjudgments
As well. Exits were being blocked

Down every hall I walked

Well, I knew it all along, of course,

But thought it was in the future,

This desire 
For a place respecting anonymity

Oiling your .38 Special,
Like a criminal readying for benefits

This and more

Shaded by echoing buildings
With a glance toward the harbor

The water rough with small debris
Today

When I left Eli Zabar the cut-out star on the window
was whirling in the animation of the rich and hungry
hunched over tables for a $30 sandwich and a Diet Coke.
It was raining and the blurred glass of the galleries
the diaphanous blue on the fleshy rocks,
the melting opal of the shoals.
Inside the Whitney the rain trailed down my face;
and I found myself in a quiet corner staring
at the pink face of Marilyn Monroe.
I could still smell the smoldering high-tech plastic
as it burned the air. In the whiteness of her teeth,
in the almost aahh of her mouth and the half-drugged eyes
under the lids of teal shadow, the air kept singeing my nose.
like a stretched mesh and litho ink
where plain form is a place of no desire
like the empty mirror of the Hudson at dawn.
In the fissures of her make-up, the planes of color
to the deception by the Falls on her honeymoon
and alarmed, and later desperate for the affirmation,
and the faintest scent of ground zero
sifts down on the walls
whiter than the wingtip vortices
 of melting in the morning light.

The guys who drank quarts of Busch last night
here by the backstop of this baseball diamond
Jack might be
a skinny guy in a black fake-leather jacket,
his jaws always have these little black extra hairs,
she lives on french fries and ketchup,
in the last two years, ever since he lost
his job unloading produce trucks at Pathmark;
Kenny is forty-eight, a flabby man with reddened skin,
he is employed at the Italian Market selling fish
just four hours a day but his shirts hold the smell;
his female companion Deena left him a note last month:
He hangs with Jack because Jack talks loud
as if the world of cops and people with full-time jobs
could be kept at bay by talking, talking loud . . .
Jack and Kenny. (Or two other guys dark to me with wounds
oozing in Philadelphia ways less ready to narrate.)
and bought four quarts at the Fireside Tavern
and wandered into this park. After one quart of Busch
Jack said he was Lenny Dykstra
so Kenny went to the mound and pitched his bottle
for want of anything better and Jack swung in the dark and missed;
the absurdity of all his desiring since seventh grade,
absurdity of a skinny guy who blew everything since seventh
when he hit home runs and chased Joan Rundle around the gym
so Jack took his own empty bottle and smashed it down
Then they leaned on the backstop to drink the other two quarts
and they both grew glum and silent
and when they smashed these bottles it was like
what else would they do? Next morning
Nick and I come to the park with a rubber ball
and a miniature bat. Nick is not quite three
but he knows the names of all the Phillies starters
and he knows the area around home plate is not supposed to be
covered with jagged pieces of brown glass. Like a good dad
I warn him not to touch it and we decide to establish

Home from school at six years old, first grade,
And uncle there to tell me Mommy
Gone, Mommy not be coming back any
Time soon, Liam, Mommy had to go to
Mental hospital. Nervous breakdown.
Years later Mommy, when she gets out
Going to send me back, back
Into mental hospital, like you did
I find out Mom had been doing years
In a federal prison all that time,
For stealing, so no mental hospital for
Mommy. Breakdown ours alone.
I was on my own.

But to whatever animal we ascribe these remains, it is certain such a one has existed in America, and that it has been the largest of all terrestrial beings. It should have sufficed to have rescued the earth it inhabited, and the atmosphere it breathed, from the imputation of impotence. . . .
I called for armour, rose, and did not reel.
But when I thought . . .
My wound open wide.
 THE STATES
For he can creep.
Whose doctor said his bipolar was pre-existing.
Smacked in the head by a steel cargo door,
hinges tied with a hamburger bag.
The day he blew up: a sucking silence, mouth of tar,
bump and rattle, caissons rolling.
The blacked-out school bus window is
scratched to read GHOST RECON. Street signs flash by,
to Andrews Air Force, wheelchair bus to Walter Reed.
Wounded when burning poppies, now afloat
The navigator slides along a wall:
Where the gazebo is a tank. Where the manhole covers a bomb.
Who apologize for shaving cuts. Skull plate,
They limp by drug dealers for their scoop
of Baskin-Robbins. Are told,
Who are saved, but die in dreams,
salute with a mechanical arm.
CONSTITUTION AVE, CAPITALSAURUS DAY
Beneath the marble, beneath the paper laws;
the paved boglands and legs-up taverns,
the slave-built steps of the Capitol. Winter 1898,
a sewer-man digs up a dinosaur spine,
tombed later at the Smithsonian
that rattled his pocket, cherished knuckle-bone
and proof against the French naturalist
wrote that New World dampness and cold
had stunted flora, animals, and Man:
Jefferson ordered Lewis & Clark to find
grazing somewhere west
which may be an ancestor of the Tyrannosaurus rex,
NOW, THEREFORE, I, MAYOR OF THE DISTRICT
OF COLUMBIA, do hereby proclaim January 28, 2001,
Anthony A. Williams
DISCOVERY IN SIBERIA
Reindeer of the herdsman Jarkov nuzzle
a tusk frozen 20,000 years. Soon,
French naturalists arrive. Radar shows
the Holy Grail of Mammoth hunters,
Timber saws cut the block. Hoisted by
gulag caves, frozen labs for scientist-prisoners,
now re-opened. Waving hair-dryers
can film them planting clone eggs
inside an elephant, hatching a Mammoth
American defender to split the ramparts,
show scheduled for release in 2001
the monkeys learn to talk;
the Capitalsaurus and the new President Bush;
when Mohammed Atta decides he
SECURITAS
Weary headlands roll through zones of night,
red lights flash the muted streets,
We sleep, staring. Tree-shapes and stars prod us,
And the king, our godsbody, lies abed
His spit and sperm are tallied; his temperature,
a weather report told by doctors. Until
her bloodlined hands, the blank, bureaucratic face!
We pray with our bodies: cold sweat, a hymn
of twitches, heart racing, shrieking dreams . . .
But fragrant Securitas has only
To compass him about.
Lifting out her breast.
Stoppers his mouth with a thick nipple.
Squeezing till the ichor throbs from his eyes,
IRAQ & TEXAS: DJINN ROADS
 Helicopters park at Forward Base EXXON;
 only the sand is flying today, and it breaks
 the speed limits, 50 miles an hour. Visibility zero;
 the air is hot as blood, the sky is burnt amber.
In Texas, teens patrol the roads by night,
George, fishtailing dauphin, a graceful
falldown drunk, clouds the breathalyzer:
yellowcake Chevy mows down her boyfriend:
VEHICULAR HOMICIDE: the car found guilty.
sweats beneath foundation garments and paste.
His unmarked body, and fructifying breath,
They walk, O my darling, the hill of light;
 Then it rains. What falls from the sky is not water
 but mud, raindrops pulling clouds of sand
 Col. Gibbs. Lights a cigarette, his back to the storm:
HOTEL AFTERMATH
 From the dust, the limbs jerk up alive, stagger home
 to camp. Martian: neck gators for the nose, goggles
 seal off the eyes, baby wipes. WHAT DID YOU FIND THERE?
 A slipper, an ear, some wire. A chemical suit.
no Frankenstein DNA. They rewrite the Mammoth show.
Whose mother swallows all the soldier medicine.
to give his body. They try in their power,
the maid said it was cow bones. Sweet heartland,
Governor Meriwether Lewis
shoots himself in the chest and head.
Who sit by the apples and wingback chairs.
Who cannot count his change.

I think it is interesting
though not exactly amusing
how we go from day to day
with no money. How do we
do it, friends ask, suspecting
we really have some stash
stacked away somewhere.
But we certainly do not
and we also do not know
how we do it either.
You sure are lucky,
some of our friends say. I am
none too sure of that though,
as I wait for the winning
lottery numbers to be announced
on CKLW. Thursday in Detroit
is the day of dreams. We have
been dreaming of a place
none too sure that is very healthy.
also been a problem that probably
has something to do with no money,
taking turns politely of course.
Could you bring me some more
tea one of us will ask,
and the other will.
In between the coughing and
worrying our thoughts
have often turned to crime.
We seriously wonder how we can
get away with a bundle with
as little risk as possible.
Last week we took our last
$12 out of the bank
and noticed how much more
they had there though
we had none. Of course
they know us there
as the ones who bring
the rolls of pennies in.
And just yesterday they
fish-eyed us for trying
from his grandparents
after only one month.
but I do know of one up north
that may be possible. . .
I know this just seems like
romantic dreaming
but I practically make a career
of reading detective stories,
and God knows, I have no other.
Anyway if the right opportunity
comes along, we are more
than ready to meet it.
But this is a time of waiting,
the I Ching says, though it does
not say how we are to eat
while waiting. And soon
Ann now in her seventh month,
and that is often in our thoughts.
Besides all that we are both
over thirty, artist and poet,
still waiting to cross the great water.
Meanwhile, day after day,
there is still Detroit
says our friend Snee.
Big fish we used to answer him,
but that was a while back.
Now we think maybe Lake Erie
is the great water referred to
in the I Ching, and if we wait
long enough we can
or Cleveland. In a healthy person,
says the philosopher, self-pity
can be a forerunner to action:
once the problem is seen clearly,
a solution may be found at hand.
And as I said, I think it is interesting
though not exactly amusing.

For I have seen love
and his face is choice Heart of Hearts,
a flesh of pure fire, fusing from the center
where all Motion is one.
And I have known
despair that the Face has ceased to stare
at me with the Rose of the world
but lies furled
in an artificial paradise it is Hell to get into.
If I knew you were there
I would fall upon my knees and plead to God
to deliver you in my arms once again.
But it is senseless to try.
One can only take means to reduce misery,
confuse the sensations so that this Face,
what aches in the heart and makes each new
start less close to the source of desire,
fade from the flesh that fires the night,
with dreams and infinite longing.

Our age bereft of nobility
I look for love.
dry and cracked with want
My poem shall show the need for it.
That is why no one dares tackle it.
I had love once in the palm of my hand.
See the lines there.
its game, are playing now
in the bounds of white and heartless fields.
Fall down on my head, love,
drench my flesh in the streams
so that I light up as
and I am showered by the scent
And carry our souls and bodies
Pushed on by the incompletion
I hesitate before this paper
Paul Klee scratched for seven years
at his face! he who has spent
rises on the rooftops, beginning
w/ violet. I begin in blue
knowing why we are cool.
My middle name is Joseph and I
walk beside an ass on the way to what
Bethlehem, where a new babe is born.
America, you boil over
Let me ramble here.
yet stay within my own yardlines.
I go out of bounds
oh attack.
That love is my strength, that
I am overpowered by it:
is on the face: gone stale.
When green was the bed my love
and I laid down upon.
You hear upon a day in June.
And I see no end in view
when summer goes, as it will,
upon the roads, like singing
companions across the land.
Go with it man, if you must,
but leave us markers on your way.
South of Mission, Seattle,
over the Sierra Mountains,
the Middle West and Michigan,
moving east again, easy
coming into Chicago and
the cattle country, calling
to each other over canyons,
careful not to be caught
at night, they are still out,
the destroyers, and down
into the South, familiar land,
lush places, blue mountains
of Carolina, into Black Mountain
and you can sleep out, or
straight across into States
I cannot think of their names.
This nation is so large, like
our hands, our love it lives
with no lover, looking only
for the beloved, back home
into the heart, New York,
New England, Vermont green
mountains, and Massachusetts
my city, Boston and the sea.
Again to smell what this calm
ocean cannot tell us. The seasons.
Only the heart remembers
and records in words
of works
we lay down for those men
who can come to them.
At last. I come to the last defense.
My poems contain no
lady of the lake music
of the spheres, or organ chants,
yet by these lines
I betray what little given me.
One needs no defense.
6.18.58

I had heard the story before 
about the two prisoners, alone 
in the same cell, and one 
gives the other lessons in a language. 
after year they practice, 
waiting for the hour of release. 
They tackle the nouns, the cases, and genders, 
the rules for imperatives and conjugations, 
but near the end of his sentence, the teacher 
suddenly dies and only the pupil 
goes back through the gate and into the open 
world. He travels to the country of his new 
language, fluent, and full of hope. 
Yet when he arrives he finds 
that the language he speaks is not 
the language that is spoken. He has learned 
his cell-mate and teacher.
evening, I heard the story again. 
This time the teacher was Gombrowicz, the pupil 
was his wife. She had dreamed of learning 
Polish and, hour after hour, for years 
on end, Gombrowicz had been willing to teach 
her a Polish that does not and never 
did exist. The man who told 
the story would like to marry his girlfriend. 
They love to read in bed and between
them speak three languages. 
themselves knew what was funny. 
I wondered why the man had told 
the story, and thought of the tricks 
enclosure can play. A nod, or silence, 
drifts beyond the scene and the two 
stand pointing in different directions 
at the very same empty sky.
else about the story, like teaching 
creature might prance on two legs 
or a two-legged creature might 
fall onto four.
then, the miscarriage, and before that 
the months of waiting: like baskets filled 
with bright shapes, the imagination 
run wild. And then what arrived:
the event that was nothing, a mistaken idea, 
a scrap of charred cloth, the enormous 
present folding over the future, 
like a wave overtaking 
a grain of sand. 
I once knew about twins who spoke 
a private language, though one 
spoke only the truth and the other 
only lies. The savior gets mixed 
up with the traitor, but the traitor 
stays as true to himself as a god. 

All night the rain falls here, falls there,
and the creatures dream, or drown, in the lair.

 The seasonable or more rabid heats
 Of love and summer in some other cities
 Unseal the all too human: not in his.
 When it is cold it stinks, but not before;
 Smells to high heaven then most creaturely
 When it is cold. It stinks, but not before
 His freezing eye has done its best to maim,
 To amputate limbs, livelihood and name,
 Abstracting life beyond all likelihood.
 When it is cold it stinks, and not till then
 Colder and colder, Murphy to Molloy,
 The weather hardens round the Idiot Boy,
 The gleeful hero of the long retreat.
 When he is cold he stinks, but not before,
 This living corpse. The existential weather
 Smells out in these abortive minims, men
 Who barely living therefore altogether
 Live till they die; and sweetly smell till then.
 
I was born in minutes in a roadside kitchen a skillet
 whispering my name. I was born to rainwater and lye;
I was born across the river where I
was borrowed with clothespins, a harrow tooth,
broadsides sewn in my shoes. I returned, though
it please you, through no fault of my own,
pockets filled with coffee grounds and eggshells.
I was born still and superstitious; I bore an unexpected burden.
I gave birth, I gave blessing, I gave rise to suspicion.
I was born abandoned outdoors in the heat-shaped air,
air drifting like spirits and old windows.
I was born a fraction and a cipher and a ledger entry;
I was an index of first lines when I was born.
I was born waist-deep stubborn in the water crying
to this hall of mirrors, this horror story I was
born with a prologue of references, pursued
by mosquitoes and thieves, I was born passing
off the problem of the twentieth century: I was born.
I read minds before I could read fishes and loaves;
I walked a piece of the way alone before I was born.

And with great fear I inhabit the middle of the night
What wrecks of the mind await me, what drugs
to dull the senses, what little I have left,
what more can be taken away?

The fear of travelling, of the future without hope
or buoy. I must get away from this place and see
that there is no fear without me: that it is within
unless it be some sudden act or calamity

to land me in the hospital, a total wreck, without
memory again; or worse still, behind bars. If
I could just get out of the country. Some place
where one can eat the lotus in peace.

For in this country it is terror, poverty awaits; or
am I a marked man, my life to be a lesson
or experience to those young who would trod
the same path, without God

unless he be one of justice, to wreak vengeance
on the acts committed while young under un-
due influence or circumstance. Oh I have
always seen my life as drama, patterned

after those who met with disaster or doom.
Is my mind being taken away me.
I have been over the abyss before. What
is that ringing in my ears that tells me

all is nigh, is naught but the roaring of the winter wind.
Woe to those homeless who are out on this night.
Woe to those crimes committed from which we
can walk away unharmed.

So I turn on the light
And smoke rings rise in the air.
Do not think of the future; there is none.
But the formula all great art is made of.

Pain and suffering. Give me the strength
to bear it, to enter those places where the
great animals are caged. And we can live
at peace by their side. A bride to the burden

that no god imposes but knows we have the means
to sustain its force unto the end of our days.
For that is what we are made for; for that
we are created. Until the dark hours are done.

And we rise again in the dawn.
Infinite particles of the divine sun, now
worshipped in the pitches of the night.

When I woke the darkness was so thick,
 So palpable and black that my eyes
 Seemed blind as stone staring into stone.
 The blade that I had dreamed, efficient and quick
 As it cut into my thigh, cleaning a gangrened
 Wound infected to the bone, seemed poised
 Above my throat: Close-grained, impenetrable,
 The blackness rose before me like a wall.
 And then off in the next room, nervous, light,
 A soft padding as of an animal
 Raced like my heartbeat in my temples
 Round and round, trapped, stealthily desperate
 As if hunting its own track, terrified
 And captivated by its own odor.
 Skin cool in the night air, eyes drilling
 Through the dark, who I was before I
 Slept had burned off like a vapor
 So that amnesiac and pure, witnessing
 My terror that I no longer recognized
 As my own, my mind floated beyond me
 To confront that frantic, closing footfall
 Though in my wrestling nothing blessed me
 Or promised any blessing; but was a mask whose eyes
 Were all black pupil, blind as molten tar.
 I strained to see what paced there, my eyes burning
 Through the dark until a pair of eyes blazed
 Back across the blackness, an insistent, glazed
 Staring that shimmered and disappeared.
 The shining blade plunged at my throat, my mind
 Stretched and twisted, its wires tightening
 And turning as the creature lunged back and forth
 And with a deep-throated yowling, thrashing
 And thrashing to fight clear of its own circling,
 Cleanly leapt away. I reached for the knife
 But gripped only air, my eyes pressing
 Cutting the way the knife had cut into my wound,
 Probing for the white shining of the bone:
 What had I become? What darkness had my dream
 Led me down into? Too frightened even 
 To move, I lay bound and sweating in
 The sheets, the moon a warning-bell beating
 On the glass, its light carving out the curtains
 Like the shadow of a wing across the windowpane.

Maybe my soul is straight and good,
its weight sends her staggering.
She has no bed, she has no home,
she merely hangs on my sharp bones,
flapping her terrible wings.

And my hands are completely shot, 
shriveled, worn: here, take a look
at how they clammily, clumsily hop
like rain-crazed toads.
As for all the other stuff,
and let me drop.

Is it because of my mug
with its frowning mouth?
So often I would itch
to be luminous and free of fog 
but nothing would approach
except big dogs.
And the dogs got zilch.

I was climbing up the sliding board
When suddenly I felt
A mosquito bite my bottom
And it raised a big red welt.

So I said to that mosquito,
If I took a pair of tweezers

He shriveled up his body
And he shuffled to his feet,
But a skeeter's got to eat!
Still, there are mosquito manners,
And I must have just forgot 'em.
And I swear I'll never never never

But a minute later Archie Hill
And Buck and Theo Brown
Were horsing on the monkey bars,
Hanging upside down.
They must have looked delicious
From a skeeter's point of view
'Cause he bit 'em on the bottoms,
Archie, Buck and Theo too!

You could hear 'em goin' HOLY!
You could hear 'em goin' WHACK!
You could hear 'em cuss and holler,
Goin' smack, smack, smack.

A mosquito's awful sneaky,
A mosquito's mighty sly,
But I never never never
Thought a skeeter'd tell a lie.

IN LIGHT ROOM IN DARK HELL IN UMBER IN CHROME,
smoke the drain and flow of motion of exhaustion, the long sounds of cars
on the wall. I sit or stand. Caught in the net of glints from corner table to

A hole torn in the fabric of the world,
the web, the whole infernal weave
through which life-giving rain is falling
but mixing with the tears and with the blood.
Dead body-snatchers enter, the mega-corpses,
much in the news these days, enter and grind
bones, flesh and sinews down to dry tree bark,
mixing with tree bark, crawling with the demonic
of every stripe, no one except the one whose daily
work is close to prophecy, who feels it in his nerves
and lodges in the eyes, all-seeing, all-pervading vision
of disaster. And comes in like a mouse, wee small,
[wee modest, so wee, wee practical,] mouse with big ears
and popping eyes, looking this way and that and not
one tittle-tattle fazed by your huge presence. Later
drowns in a bucket with a lizard: everything drowns
round here getting to water. Not able to get out again.
Thus coming quietly, thus probing, [thus stealing in,]
squatting thus quietly back of the house:
how do the tears well up, well down again,
what makes them well, the seeing eyes know not,
what routes the change parent-to-orphan? Stop.
Orphan-to-parent? Stop. Then back again to tears?
Look out beyond the healthy trees preserved
in a close circle round the house for privacy,
look out the window over hills and dales
of this milagro country, see living green, see dying
Criminal imbeciles who run the shows we live in
from top to bottom of their slimy theater, have now
decreed they will not solve the water. Matter of fact,
percentage water in all of us compounded. They will not
solve a single problem by the name of life we give
to human business. They will prefer
to dip their steel in blood, to let the semen drip
from off of their steel into the blood and thus contaminate,
infuse with every cancer both body politic and body
gives to other individuals their mien and color. Ghosts
walk the hills and dales between the dying trees.
those days you took no notice of, counting them poor,
dispersing them among the memories you could not value
at their true worth, you could not recognize enough to feel:
who knows if these few days, [these very days], were not

You can read almost anything
about angels, how they bite off
the heads first, copulate with tigers,
tortured Miles Davis until he stuck
a mute in his trumpet to torture them back.
The pornographic magazines ported
into the redwoods. The sweetened breath
of the starving. The prize livestock
rolls over on her larval young,
the wooden dwarf turning in the cogs
of the clockworks. I would have
a black bra hanging from the shower rod.
I would have you up against
the refrigerator with its magnets
for insurance agents and oyster bars.
Miracles, ripped thumbnails,
everything a piece of something else,
archangelic, shadow-clawed,
the frolicking despair of repeating
decimals because it never comes out even.
the impurities of darkness
sometimes called stars. Mostly
the world is assignations, divorces
conducted between rooftops. Forever
and forever the checkbook unbalanced,
the beautiful bodies bent back
like paper clips, the discharged
blandishing cardboard signs by the exits.
Coppers and silvers and radiant traces,
gold flecks from our last brush,
not in the aimed-for heart but throat
that has the say. There are no transitions,
only falls.

I
Students, look at this table
And now when you see a man six feet tall
You can call him a fathom.
Likewise, students when yes and you do that and other stuff
Likewise too the shoe falls upon the sun
And the alphabet is full of blood
And when you knock upon a sentence in the
Process of explication you are going to need a lot of rags
Likewise, hello and goodbye.
Nick Algiers is my student
And he sits there in a heap in front of me thinking of suicide
And so, I am the one in front of him
And I dance around him in a circle and light him on fire
And with his face on fire, I am suddenly ashamed.
Likewise the distance between us then
Is the knife that is not marriage.
Like making love or writing a poem
Or drinking wine on a tropical island
With a handsome boy who wants to hold me all night.
And in dreaming myself upon the moon
I have made the moon my home and no one
Can ever get to me to hit me or kiss my lips.
And as my bridegroom comes and takes me away from you
You all ask me what is wrong and I say it is
That I will never win.

That quality of the great boxers
to be able to stand there
and take shots,

gargle with firewater,
encounter intoxication
at sub- and supra-atomic levels,
like Empedocles, and descend,

not think: fifty-fifty,
to vacate molehills
when dwarves want space to grow,
to dine alone,
indivisible,

a hymn to that man.

you who enjoyed great triumphs
and walked with confidence and the memory 
of many gifts of delirium and dawns
and unexpected 
when despair wants you in its grip,
and threatens you from some unfathomable depth
with destruction 
and the guttering out of your flame:

then think of the unsatisfied ones,
with their migraine-prone temples and introverted dispositions,
loyal to a few memories
that held out little hope,
who still bought flowers,
and with a smile of not much luminosity 
confided secret desires
to their small-scale heavens
that were soon to be extinguished.

The marriage has faltered, the job has gone bad, 
Come open the door for them, Mother and Dad.

The city apartment is leaky and cold, 
The freezer, the fan, and the toilet have rusted.

The company caved, the boss went broke, 
The job and the love affair, all up in smoke. 
O heart in the doldrums, O heart in hock.

And so they return with their piles of possessions, 
Their terrified cats and their mournful expressions, 
Reclaiming the bedrooms they had in their teens, 
Clean towels, warm comforter, glass figurines.

Downstairs in the kitchen the father and mother 
As down from the hill comes Jill, comes Jack. 
The children are back. The children are back.

I was out last night,
the very picture of a sneak, dark and hunched-over,
breaking and entering again.
Why do I do it?

And why, when I can afford serious residences,
do I keep to this one room?
Perhaps if I had not lost track of the difference
between the real and the ideal
it would never have happened.
I hide here almost entirely now.

When I go out, when I creep into those silent houses,
I steal newspapers.
An armload, no more than I can carry comfortably.
Sometimes they are already tied up
on the side porch or by the kitchen stove.
Nobody misses them.
They think each other or the maid
has carried them out to the street.

They say there is something intractable out there,
the Law, the Right to Privacy,
the World.
In the days when my obsession was only a wound-up toy,
squeaking and jabbering in my chest,
I could have believed them.

I sit by the window today
(There is very little space left now,
thought I have left corridors wide enough to walk through
so I won't lose touch)
holding my latest on my lap,
handling them, fondling them, taking in every column.
They are becoming more and more precious.

My delusion grows and spreads.
Lately it seems to me
as I read of murders, wars, bankruptcies, jackpot winnings,
the news if written in that perfect style
of someone speaking to the one
who knows and loves him.

Long before they miss me, I think,
the room will be perfectly solid.
When they break in the door and, unsurprised,
hardened to the most bizarre vagaries,
begin to carry out my treasure,
death's what they'll look for underneath it all,
those fluent, muscled, imaginative men,
sweating in their innocent coveralls.

But I will be out in broad daylight by then,
answering,
having accepted utterly the heart's conditions.
Tell them I wish them well, always,
that I've been happy.

The optimists among us
taking heart because it is spring
skip along
attending their meetings
signing their e-mail petitions
marching with their satiric signs
singing their we shall overcome songs
posting their pungent twitters and blogs
believing in a better world
for no good reason
I envy them
said the old woman

The seasons go round they
go round and around
said the tulip
dancing among her friends
in their brown bed in the sun
in the April breeze
under a maple canopy
that was also dancing
only with greater motions
casting greater shadows
and the grass
hardly stirring

What a concerto
of good stinks said the dog
trotting along Riverside Drive
in the early spring afternoon
sniffing this way and that
how gratifying the cellos of the river
the tubas of the traffic
the trombones
of the leafing elms with the legato
and the leftover meat and grease
singing along in all the wastebaskets

No children;
Cold uncoils in the blood;
Science, true, not good
For you. So old,
Suddenly, or so young.
Lyric inside not to be sung.
Plug pulled, screen gone.
Sun out; mind
Bountiful, playing pain.
These are my children
In my head. Unbegotten.
This is to self-forget,
To have the future
Born forgotten.

The scientists are in terror
Wyndham Lewis chose blindness
Night under wind mid garofani,
Mozart, Linnaeus, Sulmona,
Their asperities diverted me in my green time.
A blown husk that is finished
a pale flare over marshes
Time, space,
And of man seeking good,
In meiner Heimat

Indeed it is remarkable.
Indeed it is to be remarked of my friend Savage that 
the desolation of hopes not merely deferred 
but by impracticability brutalized 
little marred his genial spirit. 
as to blight his prospects, and blacken with untimely frost the buds
of those ambitions justly excited 
by manifest powers, graces, and propensities, 
should nonetheless display
discrimination not inferior to those we deem wise,
sympathy judicious and above reproach, 
is cause for a wonder neither cynicism can besmirch nor incredulity subvert.
In and out of juvie, jacking cars at fifteen, 
snorting lines of Adderall, his nostrils stained blue,
kicked out, taken back, kicked out,
busted, paroled, busted again,
straining to reach the shiny object fallen through the grate,
tantalizing, just beyond his fingers,
finding and losing God, 
thinking as he rakes the leaves of the linden tree
outside the sublet bungalow
nothing else, maybe a few sunsets,

That whine is the sound
of waste, rot, the frantic,
grinding inability to attend
to anything but sere thwarting
of yourself, a dry corrosion
which some say they know,
(my jaw clenched as you
turn a page,
you with a heart like drywall,
I who would
lace my arms with razors,
then press them
slowly to your lips,
the metal taste
mixing with flesh,
and through gritted teeth
I making the sound
of you, you, you
do not know, meaning
only me, me)
we know best.

There were two voices in the fever dream:
Hers speaking from another room, and theirs,
The teeny-boppers, singing from the screen. 

Hers spoke a litany of grievous thanks, 
And thankful worries, who did what to whom, 

Poor thing, while theirs kept singing who wears short
Shorts, we wear short shorts, over and over 
Till I was singing too. Someone, thank God, at last, 

Was out of it, and some one else, thank God,
Had only lost a breast, and Shirley what 
A good kid, what a beauty, what a doll,

She let herself go when the bum walked out.
Thank God they never had a child. Thank God 
They smelled the smoke; they found the keys, the dog; 

Thank God they all wore short shorts as they sang
To me on little stages on the stage
Where boys and girls were dancing all around them,

Thank God, and, thank God, no one paused to wonder
Who to thank for just how bad it was.

Or else our drunken tumble was
too much in vino veritas
who sent bright draughts of sunshine down

All night rapacity had come
How soon an empty bottle makes

and when he wondered where he was

Words woke us up, reflection turned

But now I crave the swift return
like Chaplin, horrified by his
who only recognizes him

or worse awaits poor tramps like us
and meekly scolding, in a voice

The strings, as if they knew
the lovers are about to meet, begin
to soar, and when he marches in the door
while children who have grown up with one stare
steal further looks across a crowded room,
as goners tend to do.

My father loved it too,
long before the final trio came
(Ja, ja, she sighed, and gave him up forever);
he found his Sophie better late than never
and took the fifth about his silent tears
gift for feeling blue.

I went with others, threw
bouquets and caution to the whirling wind,
believing that the rhapsody on stage
would waft its wonders up to our cheap seats;
but mirrors can be beautiful fierce cheats,
delusions of an over-smitten mind;
I relished trouser roles until I had
no petals left to strew.

Up, down the avenue
I wandered like a ghost, I wondered why
a miracle is always a mirage,
then plodded home and set back all the clocks,
spent hard-won funds installing strong new locks,
telling myself if violence like this
could never sound like violins, I would
to art, not life, be true.

And I am trying to
fathom the way I got from there to here,
to watch it on your satin couch downtown
bearing in my trembling ungloved hand
a silver rose for you.

The ugly duckling remained ugly
its whole life but found others
Smoke rises from the heads in the backyard.
Do you think if I hang around here long enough
one skulking shadow to another?
Soon, my shoes will be part of the populous dirt.
Have I learned all the wrong lessons,
the last dew-clogged lawn is mowed
and the sun goes down on the ruined battlements?
Why was I given a toy train if not
to stage stupendous wrecks? Sure,
I can walk by the sea holding a hand
with as much melancholy as the next fellow,
substituting the cries of slammed waves
for the droll adumbrations of distraught
skeletons, the day taking on the sheen
of a stone removed from the mouth
and skipped between the breakers jubilant and sunk.

The world had fled, with all its silly cares
and questionable aches, and in one swoon
we rose above its stupefying airs
like flying lovesick pigs up to the moon.

The world returned, and this was a surprise
I raged against like someone on a rack,
telling the sun, tears clouding my stunned eyes,
give us our splendid isolation back.

The world came back and stayed, pain never ended,
but when the aches and cares begged for a hand,
I finally began to understand

It was a misunderstanding.
I got into bed, made love
with the woman I found there,
called her honey, mowed the lawn,
had three children, painted
the house twice, fixed the furnace,
overcame an addiction to blue pills,
read Spinoza every night
without once meeting his God,
buried one child, ate my share
of Jell-o and meatloaf,
went away for nine hours a day
and came home hoarding my silence,
built a ferris wheel in my mind,
bolt by bolt, then it broke
just as it spun me to the top.
Turns out I live next door.

I used to mock my father and his chums 
 for getting up early on Sunday morning 
 and drinking coffee at a local spot 

 No one cares about my old humiliations 
 but they go on dragging through my sleep 
 like a string of empty tin cans rattling 
 behind an abandoned car.

 you have forgotten that red-haired girl 
 who left you stranded in a parking lot 
 forty years ago, you wake up

 early enough to see her disappearing 
 around the corner of your dream 
 roaring onto the highway at sunrise.

 where the windows are covered with soot 
 and the coffee is warm and bitter.

We wear harnesses like crossing guards. 
In a pouch over the heart, 
over stent and bypass, a black 
box with leads pressed onto metal 
nipples. We pedal and tread and row 
while our signals are picked up
like the eyes cartoonists give the dead.

Angels of telemetry with vials of nitro 
watch over us. We beam to their monitors 
now a barn dance, now a moonwalk. 
They cuff us and pump and we keep on 
so tomorrow will live off today. Nurse, 
video of our cholesterol highway 
where LDL, black-hatted scowling 
donut holes on wheels, blocked traffic.

But with muscles like gutta-percha, 
By now only the dead know more about 
gravity than we do. In reply, a tape 
of Little Richard or Jerry Lee comes on 
pale infarcted pedalers, rowers, treadmillers, 
and our hearts are rising in the east.

. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .

one sad groat glazing, a needle puling thread,
at any boy with just the right hairline. Hey! I say,
distances. Yet plea-bargaining and lack of conversation
My Farmer in the Dwell. So struggle, strife,
these anxieties over such beings thirty, still smitten
the loo, the crew, the whole slough of pill-popping
Everyone knows love is just a euphemism
revisible, spell-bound.
I just wanted to write again and say

And now the silver, ripping sound of white on white, the satin,
light snow torn
under wheels, car bang metally grenading, and the wood poles,
I have always wanted to sing a song of praise
for the unscathed: myself
from gone; slim pole slicing cable
up to sheet metal, seat foam, corduroy
(like butter, the mechanic will later
tell me, poking a stiff finger through the cloth),
to pierce the exact point
I was supposed to sit, stopping
because praise begins where pain
transfigures itself,
stoppered by a deeper kind of joy: so I
transfigure myself from driver
to survivor, the blessed Lazarine failure
bolting up and opening her eyes.
And here are the thousand wrecks
from a life configured in snow before me: myself,
at five, pulled from the burning car seat;
at twelve, bleeding from the scalp
after the car throws me from my bike; at fourteen,
tumbling over the slick hood rushing;
sockets of windows with glass
bashed out into a translucent, toothy ring; lights
and bumpers clipped clean off; tires burst; deer
gravitationally hurled through my windshield; brakes
given out and worse,
the icy loop de loops
All the ways technology should have killed me
Praise for my death-hungry luck!
marriage lost,
buried in the blanks of white space, my solitude
at the Greyhound station
knowing no one to retrieve me,
carless among the other pressed tight
unbearably young mothers,
drifters, boy soldiers
shoulder to shoulder with the insane, weaving
the same thread of conversation back and forth
between ourselves. How
could this happen to me
at this age, at this stage, how
did I not notice, and will you put this seat up?
and will you lend me this quarter? and will you
call me a cab when we get back home?
The young man in the seat before me, head
full of zigzagging tight braids says,
Sure you can dig up that ballot box in Florida
buried in the Everglades, repeats it
for the amusement of the woman across from him,
who knows a presidential failure like she knows herself,
and when we pass my accident on the road points
For this, and for all these things: praise
to the white plains of Wyoming, highway coiled
like a length of rime-colored rope; to snow
broiling in the sunlight so that the landscape
takes on a nuclear glow, so bright
we have to shield our eyes from it. Praise
for myself playing at morbidity
because I thought I had a right to it
as if flesh had to follow spirit
to such a pure depth the bones themselves
could not rest but must be broken, nerves
singed then ripped out, the heart clenched madly in its chest.
As if I had nothing except this white earth, this
smashed car to praise
what I knew before and know
even better now, the hills
cold as a hip bone and tufted with ice. Praise
to my youth and to my age, praise
to ambition and small-mindedness,
the kind I recognize and the kind
I am soon to recognize; praise
to self-hatred for it keeps me alive, and praise
for the splinters of delight that can pierce it.
Praise for wood pole, praise for glass.
Praise for muscle, praise for bone.
And the sun gleams into it as our bus slides by,
the light of us a wash of gold illuminating
bodies lost, bodies regained; gleaming
like my heart here, on this earth,
bloody and still beating.

having no word, for the moment, suits it fine.
It looks at him with a dun and smooth
interiority, as a glass of rum might,
or a worn number on an apartment building:
his hands, crossed on the chest, rise and fall with breathing.
unlocking the door, peering into a glass.
The flat is empty. Is the war over yet? Or
was he here before the war? Soon, dropping salt levels
in tears, with an odd groove in his palm, as though
humming in thought the bright last name
to be able to call everything something.

I. THE FUNERAL MARCH (CHICAGO AND ORLEANS)

Once more in the city I cannot name,
the boat city, the city of light,
the city that endures its fall,
the city of pleasures and vicissitudes,
city of crime and vegetables, Pornograph City,
the city governed by the Lost and Found Department,
cabinet city, city of the bends, the opium city,
Swing City, Archetype City, city of dust,
city that eludes the seven ages, muskrat city,
the island city of daughters and wives,
Sin City, city of sincerity, the cavernous city,
the city of conventions, hatmaker city,
Alphabet City, city of the last and first,
the city called Marrakesh (I know it is not Marrkesh),
industrial city, the city of airplane booze,
center city, the city without shoulders, the city that forgot,
the trampoline city, Abacus City, the city of tears,
the real city (or the city of the desert),
the unreal city (or the city of good will),
the city of rust, of showers, of late blooming aster,
once more in the city called Halloween
(I know it is not Halloween), I gathered
the five true ingredients of gunpowder
and arranged to meet my younger brother Stetson
next noon at the Heartland Cafe.

Why do you walk with your face turned from me?
All you do is complain and complain.
What is this thing called love? It is nothing
reliable, not like this silk cravat
on which tiny turtles hover
suspended against an amber background.
The knot needs to be loosened. Night has come.
I walk in the garden amid the late-blooming roses
and guard my glass from the moon.
This morning the police came for me.
They brought a letter covered with signs
I could not decipher. They demanded
I register my address properly,
and cannot function as my delivery service.
I met their angry gazes with a sigh, and I proclaimed:
They still refused to answer my questions.
I know my life is in terrible danger.
What is this thing called love?

A degree or two to the right
of an imagined meridian
tracing and retracing the animal steps
that bring the man down narrow hallways,
a painting hangs, depicting
an almond tree in blossom, unfurling
white petals against a deepening green,
brown brushstrokes scarring the field,
and in the center of the decentered vista,
a fleck of canvas erupts through the paint,
as when air thrusts itself to fill a vacuum,
or after galactic gyrations the light
of a now-cold star reveals itself to us
and breaks the settled pattern of the sky.
For if the tree implies a quiet place
where pendulums might rest,
the heart decline to beat, a place
of time disclosing the lattice of time,
each node identical, complete within itself,
its infinite simplicity sufficient
to lure the mind out of its droning dream
of traffic, footstools, marzipan, and clouds
back to itself, if the tree must be a sign
and thereby lose the world, the tiny scar
unmakes the fiction that sustains the tree,
at the record you had waited weeks to buy,
recommended to you by a woman you barely know
who mentioned it in passing, then returned
to her diatribe against the host who failed
you had only half been listening until she said,
or ocean, not even like the early Pixies,
though it has that effect on you, something like
getting a letter addressed to someone else
that ends up addressed to you, in that
reading it with a proper sense of shame
throws your devotion to formalities
and meant to ask her how the band was spelled,
but the moment had passed, your cigarettes were out,
and the birdless night grew colder. You returned
to people you felt more familiar with,
the oddly Teutonic name in the back of your mind,
and only later came across it in the discount bin
of the Princeton Record Exchange, whose clerks
everyone knows are assholes, so the sneer
though it gripped you with a sense as far from panic
as it resembled exile. No song can bear
the weight we need to place upon it;
nothing returns as we ask it to return.
O O that T.S. Eliot
and if you think I sigh a lot
try life with T.S. Eliot
a hero. But now I can see I was wrong. I wanted him
to be heroic, but not in that guerilla theater way.
You could give him a little credit, though, for standing up
against corporate hegemony. He always buys his coffee
from locally owned establishments, and he shoplifts
all those books of poetry from Barnes and Noble.
Oh, everyone deserves a little credit. All the angry
little men in angry little rooms can write
their diagnoses, xerox their zines, and dream
In the meantime, how am I supposed to live?
None of us is getting any younger. Power clutches
THANK YOU FOR SHOPPING AT BORDERS.
WE WILL BE CLOSING IN FIFTEEN MINUTES.
a life deformed by constant struggle a life
in which you carve space out for yourself?
I want to find my happiness on my own terms.
THANK YOU FOR SHOPPING AT BORDERS.
WE WILL BE CLOSING IN FIFTEEN MINUTES.
thank God, we live in a day and age
Al the actors have been in car crashes,
THANK YOU FOR SHOPPING AT BORDERS.
WE WILL BE CLOSING IN FIFTEEN MINUTES.

THANK YOU FOR SHOPPING AT BORDERS.
WE WILL BE CLOSING IN FIFTEEN MINUTES.
as the fang pierced her heel and she sank.
This is the song of love and the law,
of what is enduring and what disappears.
Dissolving, her eye met its twin in the water
(or was it a glass in the guise of a stream?)
In the cafe, the boys drank to Orpheus.
Encircled by drafts on the tables and floor,
he waved a half-wave and lit a Gitane.
Sirens we were used to, but so early?
I saw Wojohowicz give him the news,
then returned to my book: The Invention of Chance.
This is the song of atomic decay.
Contemporary fascination
with corporal preservation
recapitulates the ancient
ceremonies of atonement,
or so, at least, it seems to me,
as I lecture empty rooms
on F.H. Bradley and the moon.
Not the moon you lovers see,
the moon as it appears to me
and me alone, my eyes refined
by distillation in the mind.
My moon rains light through long night hours
awake within the prison tower
of internal experience,
the tower holding thief and prince,
stockbroker and the child of fame,
identically, but not the same.
One hears the scraping of the key.
One wishes one were one, not me.
I always forget the name,
delphinium,
even though it was the flower

the hummingbirds
emerald-bright

heads, the clockwork machinery
of their blurred wings
thrumming swift, menacing engines.

They slipped their beaks.
as if they were swizzle sticks, deep
into the blue

throat of delphinium and sucked
dry the nectar-
chilled hearts like goblets full of sweet,

frozen daiquiri.
I liked to sit on the back porch
in the evenings,

watching them and eating Spanish
peanuts, rolling
each nut between thumb and forefinger

to rub away
the red salty skin like brittle
tissue paper,

until the meat emerged gleaming,
yellow like old
ivory, smooth as polished bone.

And late August,
after exclamations of gold
flowers, tiny

and bitter, the caragana
trees let down their

at first there was
the soft drum of popcorn, slick with oil,
puttering some-

where in between seed, heat, and cloud.
Then sharp cracks like cap
gun or diminutive fireworks,

caragana
peas catapulting skyward like
pellet missiles.

Sometimes a meadowlark would lace
the night air with
its elaborate melody,

rippling and sleek
as a black satin ribbon. Some-
times there would be

a falling star. And because
this happened in
Wyoming, and because this was

with anything,

at any time, I always wished
that I was some-
where, anywhere else, but here.

They have us corralled 
in the basement of the courthouse. 
just like first grade, our desks facing Teacher 
in neat little rows. 

wooden benches like pews and red 
the longest. No creditors have come to claim us 

This guy from the graveyard shift 
stares at his steel-toed boots, nervous hands 
in his lap. None of us look each other 

chemo bills, a gambling addiction, 
a summer spent unemployed and too many 
cash advances to pay the rent. 
We examine the pipes that hang 
from the ceiling, the scratched tiles on the floor, 

the red glow of the exit sign at the end of the hall 
so like our other failed escapes: 
light of the TV at night, 
glass of cheap Merlot beside a lamp, 
a stop light on the way out of town. 

For every doubt a speech.

He plans to quarter it and quarter the quarters.
The knife first rehearses 
a meridian, then the equator,

then mid-cut tilts
You can tell he thinks about

what thought is bad at. You can see
that by comparison a chimp would appear,
within its limitations, deft, while the man

with no limitations with respect to principles of melon-slicing
does not. You can tell
he withholds himself from cantaloupe,

as if frightened they will go extinct and take
costs sunk in the skill of slicing them, and further tell
it will be the same next time, him approaching

the fruit as though newly, wondering if it had
a stone in it, or pith and segments,
or required coring, or stank when punctured,

or would show pleasing shapes in section.
He switches grip,
placing his palm over the fat edge of the blade

because a sock puppet has squeaked, 
Safety first.
The rinds parted from the sixteenths

are more or less a waste of flesh, according as thrift
argued with intemperance. You can tell
the impending chunks will be publicly homely, not those

of the cruise ship buffet where the night-shift Neopolitan
surpasses himself with flutes and scallops.
You can tell right off a mind unquiet

and at once absent, now remembering
J. at seventeen,
something out of a Kenyan Vermeer,

smiling elfinly as she sliced the cantaloupe.
You could tell by the way she sliced the cantaloupe

the way one slices a cantaloupe would tell a lot.
He draws the knife
along each inside edge to shave the pulp and seedmatter,

varying pressure, speed, and angle of attack
like a deaf man bowing a cello.
Stutters mark the inner faces. He slices

the slices radially into chunks, and varies
the spacing between the cuts from equal angles,
which makes the pieces too big at the center,

to equal volumes, which makes them too long at the poles.
You can tell, as he squeezes a lime-half over the pile
and steps back to admire his freehanded

benighted by-committee cantaloupe-justice,
or run for office, the erratic hexes him, he

circulates sometimes fogged and twitching in his house,
not wishing you could not tell, 
exactly, but wanting out.

As a kid, it was a glass-floored elevator
I crouched at the bottom of, my eyes squinched tight,
(The nothing rising underfoot). Then later
The high-dive at the pool, the tree-house perch,
Ferris wheels, balconies, cliffs, a penthouse view,
The merest thought of airplanes. You can call
It a fear of heights, a horror of the deep;
That makes me giddy, makes my stomach lurch,

lint in the bottoms of pant pockets; 
it gives the hands something to do, 
especially since I no longer hold 
shovel, hod, or hammer 
in the daylight hours of labor 
in twenty-five years. A long time 
to be picking lint from pockets. 
Perhaps even long enough to have 
gathered sacks full of lint 
to good use, maybe spun into yarn 
Christmas present, or strong thread 
whirled and woven into a tweedy jacket. 
Imagine entering my classroom 
in a jacket made from lint. 
Who would believe it? 
the son of a bricklayer with hands 
for picking lint. 

can kill you
can fade your life away
friends are all out shopping
suicide hotline is busy
and here i am on my own
with a pill and a bottle for company
and heart full of been done wrong

saturday afternoons are killers
when the air is brisk and warm
soon the life you know will be done
best friend out of town
alone with a pill and a bottle
i drink my troubles down

the man i love is a killer
the man i love is a junky
the man i love is grief

some call saturday the sabbath
here with a pill and a bottle
and a life full of been done wrong
for a song

I'm preparing myself for an extended period of loneliness
That will begin very soon I think
I've illegally downloaded two new depressing songs
I've placed a copy of Good Morning, Midnight under my pillow for easy reference
I've printed out the tablature for every Morrissey song I know so I can sing them to myself
Alone in my room
Just a few things are needed really
To make me calm
While I figure out a simple, clean, and effective way to kill myself,
With minimal stress for the person who has to find and dispose of my body
But I'll probably never think of a way
Because I'll probably never kill myself
I'll just lie in my bed suffocating myself with my pillows
While listening to the four songs you said were your favorite
And maybe burn myself a little with the iron
On special occasions
And the next time I'm in a subway station,
I'll stand a little further on the yellow line
Or maybe the next I'm at your apartment
I'll try a little harder

He glanced around to check if the treacherous gods
had really given him the reward promised for his accomplished song
and there she was, Eurydice restored, perfectly naked and fleshed
in her rhyming body again, the upper and lower smiles and eyes,
the line of mouth-sternum-navel-cleft, the chime of breasts and hips
and of the two knees, the feet, the toes, and that expression
of an unimaginable intelligence that yoked all these with a skill
she herself had forgotten the learning of: there she was, with him
just for an instant as she vanished. And then he heard her from
the invisible veil, absence: a shrill and batlike but lexical indictment.
Why had he violated the divine command, why, when he had seized
all song to himself and robbed her of power to open her own
It grew in volume and now seemed to spew from an insane old
hanging like a huge withered testicle from a rent in her weathered
who was being watched by a tall woman, copper-helmet-coiffed,
a mythical allusion, since salmon were long extinct in the bays and
songs never brought them anymore. The young restrained breasts
oppressed him equally and he went to live among men, waiting for
and the competent to join forces and come for him with their
Orpheus listened patiently to my poem and when it quieted he said
That wasn't it at all. I sang outward from my face to blue spaces
to fern fronds, and men and women sipped my song as you drink
What I sang is lost in time, you don't kmow what it was, all you have
old stories about me. And if women tore me into pieces, maybe that
each one keeps part of my body, which is melody among visible

Your idea of embracing horror
was overwhelmed by the horror:

milkiness of the afternoon, on the bluff
that commands a vision of bank towers
knifing up far higher than the rising, empty
shell of the moon ... on the height where you stand
and still can't understand your life
as anything but slow dying, your time seeps out
as into a warm bath, the way the exemplary career
once leaked away.

Missionary girl reports that Chinese addicts say
your heart begs you to stay away

even while your legs are carrying you back.
After the merry little jitter of the filter

and the smack dancing in the spoon, after

heartsick, digging for a vein in February

as in a February gone and a February 
still to come, spitting prayers through the tourniquet

between my teeth, licking up tears and pleading
for my blood to plume up in the barrel, please

blossom up, squid-ink, blood-anemone 

his forehead, as he missed and bled and raged 
to get it IN. Blood: thank Christ. Spit out

the tie, inject the welling gratitude

for the help and hope of friends

all of it driven down before one flood,
one gut-bracing stealth of warmth. Ah

well: restorative as sunshine to a snake.
So around the days and seasons 

lantern-show flicker of tail-chasing, nameless days

spent waiting, cheating, waiting, struggling to outrun

her younger years, the child she might have had.

Where once I loved my flesh,
That social fellow,
Now I want security of bone
And cherish the silence of my skeleton. 

Where once I walked the world
Hunting the devil,
Now I find the darkness and the void
Within my side.

First to be good, then to be happy I
Worked and prayed.
Before the midnight, like the foul fiend,
I killed my dear friend.

Hope unto hope, dream beyond monstrous dream
I sought the world.
Now, at the black pitch and midnight of despair,
I find it was always here.

Homeless and never sadder,
dragging bags, spending money,
leaning over luggage,

And then I lift it and walk 
to find one book.

Up Iffley Turn to the Hawkwell and Tree Inns
and down over a lock
into an extended filthy river
through the Thames Valley
and over a meadow into town:
two fats,
one fishing and one man on a bike
swerving through Cotswold cow pads.
I ask:

No, yes, no!
Circle Magdalen College, and the mall, the High,
Broad Street, po and Headington Hill,
Brookside and Christ Church,
cross big pavement stones and cobbles
to Holywell
and down North Parade, Maison Blanc, Browns,
the Phoenix Cinema on Walton Street
where you can bring your wine into the film.
Asbestos,
white dust, condiments, Pret Manger,
T.S. Eliot, Philip Larkin, smelly markets, buskers 
on a harp
and a xylophone, buses and bicycles.
Red-faced riotously quiet British. . . .
Earl green carpets and rotten wood frames,
lavender, and buttery daisies,
flagelot beans, bar food, the stink of perfumes
over toilets, Blackwell has none,
St. Philips does, what are you looking for:

Thomas Merton.

(There are so many mental ways
and Abbot Patrick in his cassock stands high above
the church is in ruins.)

and now it is time to pray

No.
Everything you see is finished.
A grand finale unfolds across the lens.
The book is out of print.

Deafness to imperatives
is profundity in the wise man,
children and grandchildren

To represent a particular outlook,
to act,
to travel hither and yon
are all signs of a world
In front of my window
is a valley
where shadows pool,
two poplars mark a path,
leading you will know where to.

Perspective
is another word for stasis:
you draw lines,
they ramify
and they disburse crows in swarms
in the winter red of early dawns

Drew down the curse of heaven on her umbrella
furled and smelling of wet cigarettes,
Jo ran off in rain one pitchy night,
one bloody a.m. found her staring, snoring.

She tripped the little bomb of wasps.
They got her.

Tears for Jo, four, each perfect, waspish.
decants a funeral oblation for the mouse.
Not reading English,
and hearing about a new English thriller

and not being able to afford it.

Having an idea
the way the professors do.

Hearing the waves beat against the shore on holiday at night,

Very bad: being invited out,
when your own room at home is quieter,
the coffee is better,

And worst of all:
not to die in summer,
when the days are long
and the earth yields easily to the spade.
Frosty, green through gray rising steeply,
top of the bank a big top, red with a sign,
misty, fantastical on the walk to school.

Imagine if those performers
were stuck in their caravans
forever. If round the back of the big top

cramped clean-faced clown
drinking tea, practicing tricks,
movement through frosted windows.

Language is her caravan on bricks,

At the weekend he and his sister
stood on the frosty bank
beside his metaphor. She read the poster
carefully, got them sat down in good time and at the back.

The trapeze artist, lion tamer, freshly-made-up clown
filled the top with a noise he could go on translating forever.

Walking home she opened her chest:

The poet is a man who feigns
And feigns so thoroughly, at last
He manages to feign as pain
The pain he really feels,

And those who read what once he wrote
Feel clearly, in the pain they read,
Neither of the pains he felt,
Only a pain they cannot sense.

And thus, around its jolting track
There runs, to keep our reason busy,
The circling clockwork train of ours
That men agree to call a heart.

Each house smells of strangers:
cabbage boiling on the stove,
 harsh soap at the rim of the sink,
 starched sheets that scrape
 against the skin in bed,
 hard pillows shaped
 rotting bananas, sweaty feet and dust. 

 Each time we come to a new place
 I try to hide one shirt
 beneath the mattress
 just to keep the smell of home.
 Sometimes they find it,
 squeeze it through the wringer;
 hid long enough, the cloth absorbs
 the air around it, loses its memories. 

 My brother smells like sour milk,
 unwashed armpits and the school paste
 he eats. He cries
 when they hit us; I never do.
 Each night I hear
 his sniffles soak the pillow.
 Come morning, I grab the damp case,
 hold it to my nose and breathe. 

 Not the flash of salmon
 Not breath frozen in fine hairs
 Not one hand under flannel
 Not burbot at home under Tanana ice
 Not the knife blade honed, not the leather sheath
 Not raw bawling in the dog yard
 Not the gnawed ends of wrist-thick sticks
 Not solar flares scouring the earth over China
 Not rime crystals bearding a sleek cheek of snow
 Not six minutes more of darkness each day
 Not air water food words touch
 Not art
 Not anything we expect
 Not anything we expect to keep
 Not anything we expect to keep us alive

 Not the center of the sea
 Not the birthplace of the waves
 Not the compass too close to true north to guide us 

 Then with no warning

He was a big man, says the size of his shoes
on a pile of broken dishes by the house; 
a tall man too, says the length of the bed
in an upstairs room; and a good, God-fearing man,
 says the Bible with a broken back
on the floor below the window, dusty with sun;
but not a man for farming, say the fields
cluttered with boulders and the leaky barn.

A woman lived with him, says the bedroom wall
papered with lilacs and the kitchen shelves
covered with oilcloth, and they had a child,
says the sandbox made from a tractor tire.
Money was scarce, say the jars of plum preserves
and canned tomatoes sealed in the cellar hole.
And the winters cold, say the rags in the window frames.
It was lonely here, says the narrow country road.

Something went wrong, says the empty house
in the weed-choked yard. Stones in the fields
say he was not a farmer; the still-sealed jars
in the cellar say she left in a nervous haste.
And the child? Its toys are strewn in the yard
a rusty tractor with a broken plow,
a doll in overalls. Something went wrong, they say.

the winged thang built her dream palace
amid the fine green eyes of a sheltering bough
she did not know it was urban turf
disguised as serenely delusionally rural
nor did she know the neighborhood was rife
with slant-mawed felines and those long-taloned
swoopers of prey. she was ignorant of the acidity & oil
that slowly polluted the earth, and was never
to detect the serpent coiled one strong limb below

following her nature she flitted and dove
for whatever blades twigs and mud
could be found under the humming blue
and created a hatchery for her spawn
not knowing all were doomed

This old jiggerboo never grew mature.
Is everthing in its place except me?

And the only person I could reach was
Nothing is coming down but your foot.
And how deep is your stomach cause

A crease in my overalls, my collar stiff,

I cried as many tears as I have teeth.
And I only got two in my mouth. Son of the
Sun look out: as you get black you burn.
Is everything in its place except me?

Now I can see: even the trees 
are tired: they are bones bent forward 

in a skin of wind, leaning in 
osteoporosis, reaching 

for a little more than any 
oxygen can give: when living 

is in season, they can live; 
but living is no reason 

to continue: everything begins: 
and everything is desperate 

to extend: and everything is 
insufficient in the end: 

and everything is ending: 
Now I can see: even the trees
before the house had woken to make sure
that everything was in order with The Lie,
his drip changed and his shackles all secure.

I was by then so practiced in this chore
Such, I liked to think, was our rapport.

I was at full stretch to test some ligature
when I must have caught a ragged thread, and tore 
his gag away; though as he made no cry,
I kept on with my checking as before.

Why do you call me The Lie? he said. I swore:
The dark had turned his eyes to milk and sky
and his arms and legs were all one scarlet sore.

He was a boy of maybe three or four.
His straps and chains were all the things he wore.
Knowing I could make him no reply
I took the gag before he could say more

and put it back as tight as it would tie 
and locked the door and locked the door and locked the door
White hail pelting the frozen bog,
on his walk through the stone century,
around the quarry, slices of marble and mud,
past a herd of miners exhaling smoke,
past a barn smelling of merde,
mad at the stars all his life and then again.
I rethink kicking him out,
but being cool, I let him in.

When I know you are coming home
I put on this necklace:
glass beads on a silken thread,
a blue that used to match my eyes.
I like to think I am remembering you.

The necklace lies heavy on my skin,
it clatters when I reach down
to lift my screaming child.
I swing her, roll her in my arms until she forgets.
The beads glitter in the flicker of a TV set
as I sit her on my lap
and wish away the afternoon.

I wait until I hear a gate latch lift
the turn of key in lock.
I sit amongst toys and unwashed clothes,
I sit and she fingers the beads until you speak
in a voice that no longer seems familiar, only strange.
I turn as our child tugs at the string.
I hear a snap and a sound like falling rain.

Crooks run the whole world, and the Dow just fell.
Crap rules the airwaves. All your best plans stall.
Sad songs from youth no longer cast a spell.
Cancer research has run into a wall.
Some inflated hack just won the Nobel.
You witness clear signs of decline and fall.
Your cat has bad teeth. Your paychecks feel small.
Up ahead, traffic has slowed to a crawl.

We sold it. To a man
who would be a patriarch.
I told John we were closed in,
subdivisions and trailers all around,
complaints of the smell (though
there was none), Ira came out
and told me to keep them fenced
(though none broke out), the neighbors
friend heard of a hog
that ate a child who fell in the pen (though
their children rode my sows
at feeding time), because I was tired,
because Jan carried our child and could
no longer help, because she wanted a home.

And the patriarch lost his first crop
to weeds, threw a rod in the tractor,
dug a basement and moved the trailer on
for extra bedrooms, cut the water lines
for a ditch, subdivided the farm
and sold the pigs for sausage. I told John
they were his, they were no longer mine,

The wire connecting our voices was silent

a darkness, a friendship, tying to the real
but it is unreal

the clarity desired, a wish for true sight,
all tangling

caught me, turning the house

on most things, by indifference, the personal

who lost his way in the holy wood

because the way had never been taken without

and I believe my dream said one of the others

of the moth that moved him, of the other

one should never play martyr
there are martyrs beyond you

one should never argue apocalypse
without your whole lifetime before
you, which is impossible

Ralph flew to Bristol to see her
then later sent a telegram,
since he was going

My mother sleeps with the Bible open on her pillow; 
she reads herself to sleep and wakens startled. 
She listens for her heart: each breath is shallow. 
For years her hands were quick with thread and needle. 
She used to sew all night when we were little; 
now she sleeps with the Bible on her pillow 
and believes that Jesus understands her sorrow: 
her children grown, their father frail and brittle; 
she stitches in her heart, her breathing shallow. 
Once she even slept fast, rushed tomorrow, 
mornings full of sunlight, sons and daughters. 
Now she sleeps alone with the Bible on her pillow 
and wakes alone and feels the house is hollow, 
though my father in his blue room stirs and mutters; 
she listens to him breathe: each breath is shallow. 
I flutter down the darkened hallway, shadow 
between their dreams, my mother and my father, 
asleep in rooms I pass, my breathing shallow. 
I leave the Bible open on her pillow.

I was always leaving, I was 
about to get up and go, I was 
on my way, not sure where. 
Somewhere else. Not here. 
Nothing here was good enough. 

It would be better there, where I 
was going. Not sure how or why. 
The dome I cowered under 
would be raised, and I would be released 
into my true life. I would meet there 

They would make an opening for me 
among the flutes and boulders, 
and I would be taken up. That this 
might be a form of death 

did not occur to me. I only know 
that something held me back, 
a doubt, a debt, a face I could not 
leave behind. When the door 
fell open, I did not go through.

cave into the worse darkness
outside, where things pass and
the Lord is in none of them.

I have heard the still, small voice
and it was that of the bacteria
demolishing my cosmos. I 
have lingered too long on

this threshold, but where can I go?
To look back is to lose the soul
I was leading upwards towards
the light. To look forward? Ah,

what balance is needed at
the edges of such an abyss.
I am alone on the surface
of a turning planet. What

Adam, put my hand
out into unknown space,
hoping for the reciprocating touch?

running away from our patrol,
or the old man in the back of the head,
or the boy in the marketplace?

have a grenade, and the woman in Hue
with seven Marines just for food,

between Con Thien and Da Nang.

In Vietnamese, Con Thien means
place of angels. What if it really was
instead of the place of rotting sandbags,
incoming heavy artillery, rats and mud. 

What if the angels were Ames and Ski,
or the lady, the man, and the boy,
and they lifted Gaffney out of the mud
and healed his shattered knee?

What if none of it happened the way I said?
Would it all be a lie?
Would the wreckage be suddenly beautiful?
Would the dead rise up and walk?

Still half drunk, after a night at cards,
with the grey dawn taking us unaware
among our guilty kings and queens, we drove
far North in the morning, winners, losers,
to a stream in the high hills, to climb up to a place
one of us knew, with some vague view
of cutting losses or consolidating gains
by the old standard appeal to the wilderness,
the desert, the empty places of our exile,
bringing only the biblical bread and cheese
expecting to drink only the clear cold water
among the stones, and remember, or forget.
Though no one said anything about atonement,
there was still some purgatorial idea
in all those aching heads and ageing hearts
as we climbed the giant stair of the stream,
reaching the place around noon.

It was as promised, a wonder, with granite walls
enclosing ledges, long and flat, of limestone,
or, rolling, of lava; within the ledges
the water, fast and still, pouring its yellow light,
and green, over the tilted slabs of the floor,
blackened at shady corners, falling in a foam
of crystal to a calm where the waterlight
dappled the ledges as they leaned
against the sun; big blue dragonflies hovered
and darted and dipped a wing, hovered again
against the low wind moving over the stream,
and shook the flakes of light from their clear wings.
This surely was it, was what we had come for,
was nature, though it looked like art with its
grey fortress walls and laminated benches
as in the waiting room of some petrified station.
But we believed; and what it was we believed
made of the place a paradise
for ruined poker players, win or lose,
who stripped naked and bathed and dried out on the rocks
like gasping trout (the water they drank
making them drunk again), lit cigarettes and lay back
waiting for nature to say the last word
which, caught in a certain light, would sing.

The silence (and even the noise of the waters
was silence) grew pregnant; that is the phrase,
grew pregnant; but nothing else did.
The mountains brought forth not a mouse, and the rocks,
unlike the ones you would expect to find
on the slopes of Purgatory or near Helicon,
were modern American rocks, and hard as rocks.
Our easy bones groaned, our flesh baked
on one side and shuddered on the other; and each man
thought bitterly about primitive simplicity
and decadence, and how he had been ruined
by civilization and forced by circumstances
to drink and smoke and sit up all night
inspecting those perfectly arbitrary cards
until he was broken-winded as a trout on a rock
and had no use for the doctrines of Jean Jacques
Rousseau, and could no longer afford
a savagery whether noble or not; some
would never batter that battered copy of Walden
again.

the water, the sunlight, and the wind
did something; even the dragonflies
did something to the minds full of telephone
numbers and flushes, to the flesh
sweating bourbon on one side and freezing on the other.
And the rocks, the old and tumbling boulders
which formed the giant stair of the stream,
induced (again) some purgatorial ideas
concerning humility, concerning patience
and enduring what had to be endured,
winning and losing and breaking even;
ideas of weathering in whatever weather,
being eroded, or broken, or ground down into pebbles
But to these ideas did any purgatory
respond? Only this one: that in a world
where even the Memnon stones were carved in soap
one might at any rate wash with the soap.

After a time we talked about the War,
about what we had done in the War, and how near
some of us had been to being drowned, and burned,
and shot, and how many people we knew
who had been drowned, or burned, or shot;
and would it have been better to have died
in the War, the peaceful old War, where we were young?
But the mineral peace, or paralysis, of those
great stones, the moving stillness of the waters,
entered our speech; the ribs and blood
of the earth, from which all fables grow,
established poetry and truth in us,

Climbing downstream again, on the way home
to the lives we had left empty for a day,
we noticed, as not before, how of three bridges
not one had held the stream, which in its floods
had twisted the girders, splintered the boards, hurled
boulder on boulder, and had broken into rubble,
smashed practically back to nature,
the massive masonry of span after span
with its indifferent rage; this was a sight
that sobered us considerably, and kept us quiet
both during the long drive home and after,
till it was time to deal the cards.

on a day when
we were dark
and not so full of
light
we met
nothing.
everything, when we closed
our eyes
which anyway
had never been open.

once, we thought we
loved each other
we tried.
we stepped out
of space
into some new
step of distance
and not in love.

In a world where all the heroes
are pilots with voices like God

hair to wear on her wing.
She looked sideways at the ground
silent behind the cloudy film covering

her eyes knowing she would be his
forever. They cruised the city nights
each one spiralling away from the other

but always coming home to gather stories.
Dark streets bright tavern lights drunks
filled with beer in the gutters.

eyes. No babies for them. She was an outcast.

He a loner. A perfect pair.
Winters had made him wise
and he avoided the single nests of summer.

He told her about things she could see.
How the dismal cover of clouds roils and explodes

How wood rots against the tide
good for hunting grub.
How to fade and fall back into the wind.

He translated her pulse
into near-language. Their poetry so personal

Only a stray hunter saw it.
Shook his head once thinking it a trick
of wind and wing then turned his eyes north

to search for the simple flight
of Brant or Canadian. Those patterns
he could easily understand.

That last night they drank from the river.
Sucked its delicate cusps of mold
sang anti social songs as if they were humans.

When he flicked his handsome head
to catch the drift of wind
she even managed a single tear.

She waited through days and nights
of grief. Circled the city less
then settled on the wires.

The metallic conductor captured her eyes.
She remembered how he proudly sang her name
as he pranced from pole-top to KV line.

One last fluff of feathers. One sigh
for all the unnested summers.
One single scratch

one electrical surge of power of love.
Then she fell smiling.
A trick he had taught her.

child,
in the august of your life
you come barefoot to me
the blisters of events
having worn through to the
soles of your shoes.

it is not the time
this is not the time

there is no such time
to tell you
that some pains ease away
on the ebb & toll of
themselves.
there is no such dream that
can not fail, nor is hope our
only conquest.
we can stand boldly in burdening places (like earth here)
in our blunderings, our bloomings
our palms, flattened upward or pressed,
an unyielding down.

linoleum flecked with flame,
a thick coat of wax that flashed
down a corridor and led to a room,
a place where I curled up a few 
innocuous inches off the floor. 
straps hung in loops on closet hooks. 
On the nightstand a basket with 
peanut butter crackers, a vivid 
and unnatural orange, a crinkly 
wrap. A knee-high fridge stocked 
with icy juices, foil boxes, straws 
glued on. A female voice next door 
claimed she was still a human being, 
though I could not hear the reasons. 
When it was my turn, I answered 
right away, saying I knew where 
I was and why. No, I would not 
harm myself, surprised to be asked 
as I had never had the thought. 
Yes I knew where I was going next. 
Out the window and through shadow 
and streetlight, I saw how this building 
connected to the next. I was to follow 
a stripe painted on the wall. Someone 
would walk with me as well. I felt fine 
I said, and it was sort of true. Actually 
I felt nailed by one wrist to a desire 
to flee and by the other to a sincere 
longing for sleep. I was not in pain. 
Thank you. I felt like the very last note 
in a concert, the one that hovers as if 
You lean disconsolate on your stool,

As minor royalty rusticated to this
Unhelpful climate of solvents, gaskets, pliers, and bolts. 

Because they are new and manifold and useful

You feel their whispers against you. The staunch
Resistance of objects. How can I tell you

To exhaust the realm of the possible when
Is uncongenial as February and your hand unlovely?

Like a dog nearly annihilated by nerves
And boredom chewing her paw to sore, red velvet,

Closed around each bed like an eyeless socket.

That you should be making such small change!

Fingers inarticulate as moles nudge a debris 
Of dimes not thick enough to hide 

Across the tender, veined delta of your hand

Heralding indelibly the eviction 

Or the one word needled in black, knuckle-Gothic

We communicated by cheeses,
unwrapping them gingerly,
parting the crust with a fork,
tasting dew, must, salt,
raising an eyebrow,

or we let chianti talk for us,
rolling it in the glass,
or we undressed each other;

we took long walks hand in hand
in the vineyards, the pastures,
resenting each other bitterly
for our happiness that excluded us
as surely as the world did,
mountain after mountain.
It was 1986, when currencies to be changed
Swarmed through numbered bank accounts
Which not seldome attracted by the sun falls 
Radionuclides, strontium, caesium, & iodine,
Exile, before the prevailing winds blew them all
That means black stalks & tasted newly of metal),
Wet branches breaking, those were your breaths 
Of your most personal shape? Something still
To ask. As far as the bolted iron door to adust 
My vigil mild while bones leached minerals 
Curled like a seed of storm-pine in a furrow
Belonging to a Roman matron that I see,
Too late to retrieve the truth, too late not to
Into the volcano, feeling the sharp concussion
& sky, mountains, & rivers of water & fire.
We are always
really carrying
invisible. We
only know
the matter:
something precious
crashes; easy doors
prove impassable.
Or, in the body,
swing or off-
center gravity.
And, in the mind,
a drunken capacity,
access to out-of-range
apples. As though
one had a way to climb
out of the damage
and apology.

Now, when he and I meet, after all these years,
Just an old acquaintance tipping his hat.
As the bitch starts to bark hysterically.
Where are your manners, I say, as I say,
At a kind word from him, a look like the old days,
The bitch changes her tone; she begins to whimper.
She wants to snuggle up to him, to cringe.
Down, girl! Keep your distance
She slobbers and grovels.
After all, I am her mistress. She is basically loyal.
Each evening, when she heard his step;
How she lay at his feet and looked up adoringly
Though he was absorbed in his paper;
Or, bored with her devotion, ordered her to the kitchen
Until he was ready to play.
But the small careless kindnesses
Come back to her now, seem more important
Than the casual cruelties, the ultimate dismissal.
You were too demonstrative, too clumsy,
Not like the well-groomed pets of his new friends.
As I drag you off by the scruff,

As in the midst of battle there is room 
For thoughts of love, and in foul sin for mirth; 
The sweet herbs flourish on a little earth: 
So in this great disaster of our birth 
We can be happy, and forget our doom. 
For morning, with a ray of tenderest joy 
Gilding the iron heaven, hides the truth, 
And evening gently woos us to employ 
Our grief in idle catches. Such is youth; 
Despair before us, vanity behind.

All the cities are like you anyway. Windows
darken when I get close enough to see.

the good spots taken already by those
so long they must be cut by the many pairs

of wrong-handled scissors maybe god owns
I make a haunted lake and rinse and rinse.
I take what I want, and have ever since what

I want disappeared, like anything hunted.
The tourists snapped you crying,

and the blanket I brought was so dirty
it must have been lying around
in lice and blood that whole year we fought.

twitching to bury my boring eyes.
The ship made you sad, and the ferry, and canoe.
All boats do.

I gave you sorrow to hang on your wall
Like a calendar in one color.
I wear a torn place on my sleeve.

Between no place of mine and no place of yours
Just from thinking it over.
Oh I know
Like a mirror on a string,
It all keeps changing.
Loss has a wider choice of directions
Than the other thing.

As if I had a system
I shuffle among the lies
Turning them over, if only
I uncover my footprints, I
Poke them till the eyes open.
When was I using it last?
Was it like a ring or a light
Or the autumn pond
Which chokes and glitters but
Grows colder?
Nothing seems to bring it back to me.

Your hands as trees borne away on a flood,
The same film over and over,
And an old one at that, shattering its account
To the last of the digits, and nothing
And the blank end.

The lightning has shown me the scars of the future.

Alone like a key in a lock
Without what it takes to turn.

Winter will think back to your lit harvest
For which there is no help, and the seed
Of eloquence will open its wings
When you are gone.
But at this moment
When the nails are kissing the fingers good-bye
And my only
Chance is bleeding from me,
When my one chance is bleeding,
For speaking either truth or comfort
I have no more tongue than a wound.

When I know what people think of me
hat bought earlier sickens.
I have no purpose no longer distinguishable.
A feeling like being choked
enters my throat.

I forgot to tell you it's almost time to go.
The sun has distilled its particular worn essence

Of onlookers. I forgot to remember to go

Before eleven, when the steely arrow
Shot swimming to its underneath, tense
As a stream of salmon in reverse below

The laureled, relentless clocks. The sceptered row

Though many times I flopped into the silence
Of orange plastic seating like onto the bow

Of a lonely ship, and felt my breathing slow.
The frail, retreating stand of columns prevents
At my feet, a glittering trout swims past the bow.

The only thing under the sun
I can run to
is Ecclesiastes

for there is nothing gathered into one self
that can be kept

Want is humbled by death
as every purpose manifests it

Feeling this all my life
a piercing fright
gathers in the stomach's pit

This is it and this is not the end
of the road

for even despair is a kind of goad
to wisdom

The beauty of the world
over one's own anguish

The day that I lost all feeling

I was both a Fool and a Goddess

A perfect veronica, invisible, scallops air
a dusty banderilla hangs above racked bottles,
burnt-orange. Your lacquered fingers streak

Close your eyes and then the night turns to coal
seamed with diamonds. Outside, a girl murmurs
Irita, the barman calls when she wanders in
to wash at the single coldwater tap. Just a fly-blown

shuttered around their whispering, the shops that gleam
by day with scaled cellophane piglets, mounded bins
of fruit and olives. Irita rewinds her hair
tattered bullfight posters on the wall behind her

and you think of Rita Hayworth tossing roses
Such a lovely thing to torture an animal with,
in this smoke-patinaed air, abandoning

precise cold barracks. Your face wavers, oddly calm
flamenco clubs to the barman, absinthe glass shining

the clownish poseur, the girl with nothing to sell
but herself and straitened, cataleptic dreams.
She stretches, plays idly the slot machines
spinning roses, babies and lemons, the brilliant

suit of lights. The caramel glow of the barlamps haloes
click is rosary beads wafting prayers up
to a heaven of slink and spangle, quick bargains
struck in alcoves, that old palm of chapped fingers
slipping coins to the gas meter, of spreading stain

across the counterpane. Around Bar Xanadu
narrow streets fill with the violet steam
cooing that speak of want like this, that deep
original loneliness. There are heartless places

bordered with the crimes of night, with cramped
the bureau chief called you while he snipped
a fresh cigar. On parched plains outside the city

soldier boys drill before the fighter planes, glamorous
with starlight, still floating half-asleep
in some Iowa of vinyl booths and Formica, miles
your fingers the napkin snows its raddled lace
across the bar and you must rise with them, rise

to dust with the barman his green bottle, help him
and then you must walk with her these streets
riffling your skirt in the scent of blood oranges and sweat.
