Feeling her head pick up her body,
Death before resurrection is hard;
Dread says to herself: Serves me right

A Wooden way
Regardless grown,

Remembered, if outlived,

Alas, have I not pain enough, my friend, 
Upon whose breast a fiercer gripe doth tire 
Than did on him who first stale down the fire, 
While Love on me doth all his quiver spend, 
But with your rhubarb words you must contend 
To grieve me worse, in saying that Desire 
Doth plunge my well-formed soul even in the mire 
Of sinful thoughts, which do in ruin end? 
If that be sin which doth the manners frame, 
Well stayed with truth in word and faith of deed, 
Ready of wit, and fearing naught but shame; 
If that be sin which in fixed hearts doth breed 
A loathing of all loose unchastity, 
Then love is sin, and let me sinful be.

which I hate more than I hate myself: 
gobsmacked, hubby and...when I realise 
that words no longer count for much at all. 

I do not suffer for my art, I just suffer. 

what curly Shona said that night at Graffiti 
when all the gang were gathered for the show: 
how she reckoned I would be the first to die, 

to hear my best friend tell a stranger girl 

a brilliance all the unchipped faces of design
refuse. The wine collects its starlets
at a lip's fault, sunlight where the nicked
glass angles, and affection where the eye
is least correctable, where arrows of
unquivered light are lodged, where someone
else's eyes have come to be concerned.

For beauty's sake, assault and drive and burn
the devil from the simply perfect sun.
Demand a birthmark on the skin of love,
a tremble in the touch, in come a cry,
and let the silverware of nights be flecked,
the moon pocked to distribute more or less
indwelling alloys of its dim and shine
by nip and tuck, by chance's dance of laws.

The brightness drawn and quartered on a sheet,
the moment cracked upon a bed, will last
as if you soldered them with moon and flux.
And break the bottle of the eye to see
what lights are spun of accident and glass.

I should be happy with my lot: 
Enough for me to be content? 
What other blessing could be sent? 

A quiet house, and homely ways, 
That make each day like other days; 

No beggar brings his misery; 
I have no power, no healing art 
With bruised soul or broken heart. 

I read the poets of the age, 
I study Art, but Art is dead 
To one who clamors to be fed 

O foolish wish! I still should pine 
If any other lot were mine.

2.
Oh I love my white pill
that makes the black fist of pain unclench,
unspasming the nerves. I float,
released to darkness visible,
worlds dissolving.
And the yellow pill, bitter on my tongue,
that wakes me at 2 a.m.
writing out plans in Arabic
to organize an expedition to the Pole.
Drug of hubris searing my eyes,
my scrawl unreadable in daylight: foil my enemies.
Bitter taste of fugue,
my hand shakes: some foreign being in my brain giving orders.
You must You must You will.
Later, the pungent brown liquor
shoots the dark with threads of gold behind my eyes.
One flash as the mind goes out.
3.
I must elude pain
pain in the brain
Fly on a stovetop
This is illusion,
What can be undone
If you kill pain
pain does not feel pain,
My skin will crawl with bugs
Reality is so cruel.
Prednisone oh prednisone
so fast my mind racing, never tasting
rest.
Razzle-dazzle razz
(I saw a werewolf in a white suit, walking
Floppy bow tie, big furry hands.)
Percodan, Percocet, let you go, let you rest.
When the grip lets you go and you float like a note
black oil of opiate. Chatty Cathy, dirty brat,
bed-wetter, nasty pants.
Painkiller, painkiller, I have a new friend,
better than my old friend,
plugging holes in the brain:
Sigmund Freud, Sigmund Freud, Sigmund Freud, Cocaine!
I want a soft landing; let me float.
Once the seizure lifted me and threw me down.
I did not like it. I did not like lying there
on the floor looking up
through air like green water.
4.
And there is one so dark, a ghost,
it passes through the mesh of thought
without tearing a strand, whispering
destinies perceived true, pronouncing
sentences of death.
5.
A cloud, the absence of a noun, no name,
roaring far away in the summer
dark like a train, or a giant fan, or a highway that never stops.
The mind explodes in the dark of space,
unnursed by atmospheres,
as air raid sirens scream for blood
and I am only nerves, strung on constellations,
meridians and vectors quivering. A red and yellow
capsule invades the chemistry of thought; cathode rays blast
from the television screen and signals pass deep into space
will not remember this night.

I wanted to give you something for your pain.
But not the drug du jour
in a department store or dark alleyway.
I wanted to give you something for your pain
seemed too plain (too plain and too gross).
to you or me, or even Nature: a creature
more fabulous, more imaginary
or pixel-loaded screen. Some exotic anodyne
an alchemist or astrophysicist
would be envious of: a chemical reaction,
an astral refraction, an out-of-body,
out-of-mind, one-of-a-kind
transport from your pain, that would last
longer than a day, go deeper than the past.
I would have founded a whole new religion
if I thought that would suffice.
I wanted to give you something
and was hard to maintain and had a knack
for disappointing. I wanted to give you
and relentless tendency to wane
might have only exacerbated your pain).
If I could have given you something
you could depend on, could always trust
without a second thought, I would have.
A splendid view, perhaps, or a strain
of music. A favorite dish. A familiar tree.
A visit from a genie who, in lieu of granting you
a wish, would tend subtly to your every need,
and never once tire, never complain.
But when all was said and done
(or hardly said, not nearly done)
or were you so overcome your pain was all
that mattered? It seemed to me we were a kind
of kin: willing the mind its bold suspensions,
but the heart, once shattered, never quite matching
its old dimensions. And yet you persevered
in spite of pain, you knew to hold hope
as lightly as you held my hand (a phantom grasp,
a clasp that seemed to come from the other side).
And your genial smile made it plain: you were pleased
by my wish to please. And then you died.

I

I can hear little clicks inside my dream.
Night drips its silver tap
down the back.
At 4 A.M. I wake. Thinking

of the man who
left in September.
His name was Law.

My face in the bathroom mirror
has white streaks down it.
I rinse the face and return to bed.
Tomorrow I am going to visit my mother.

SHE

She lives on a moor in the north.
She lives alone.
Spring opens like a blade there.

some for my mother, some for me
This is my favourite author.

Also my main fear, which I mean to confront.
Whenever I visit my mother

my lonely life around me like a moor,
my ungainly body stumping over the mud flats with a look of transformation
that dies when I come in the kitchen door.
What meat is it, Emily, we need?

THREE

Three silent women at the kitchen table.
there is the moor, paralyzed with ice.
It extends as far as the eye can see

over flat miles to a solid unlit white sky.
Mother and I are chewing lettuce carefully.
The kitchen wall clock emits a ragged low buzz that jumps

once a minute over the twelve.
I have Emily p. 216 propped open on the sugarbowl
but am covertly watching my mother.

A thousand questions hit my eyes from the inside.
My mother is studying her lettuce.
I turn to p. 217.

who was hanging a litter of puppies

It is as if we have all been lowered into an atmosphere of glass.
Now and then a remark trails through the glass.
Taxes on the back lot. Not a good melon,

too early for melons.
Hairdresser in town found God, closes shop every Tuesday.
Mice in the teatowel drawer again.
Little pellets. Chew off

the corners of the napkins, if they knew
what paper napkins cost nowadays.
Rain tonight.

Rain tomorrow.
Anderson died no not Shirley

the opera singer. Negress.
Cancer.

Out the window I can see dead leaves ticking over the flatland
and dregs of snow scarred by pine filth.
At the middle of the moor

where the ground goes down into a depression,
the ice has begun to unclench.
Black open water comes

curdling up like anger. My mother speaks suddenly.

My mother has a way of summing things up.
She never liked Law much
but she liked the idea of me having a man and getting on with life.

was all she said after she met him.
Give and take were just words to me

at the time. I had not been in love before.
It was like a wheel rolling downhill.
But early this morning while mother slept

and I was downstairs reading the part in Wuthering Heights
where Heathcliff clings at the lattice in the storm sobbing

I fell on my knees on the rug and sobbed too.
She knows how to hang puppies,
that Emily.

Dr. Haw says grief is a long process.
She frowns. What does it accomplish

all that raking up the past?
I prevail! I look her in the eye.
She grins. Yes you do.

WHACHER

Whacher,
has caused confusion.
For example

in the first line of the poem printed Tell me, whether, is it winter?
in the Shakespeare Head edition.
But whacher is what she wrote.

Whacher is what she was.
She whached God and humans and moor wind and open night.
She whached eyes, stars, inside, outside, actual weather.

She whached the bars of time, which broke.
She whached the poor core of the world,
wide open.

To be a whacher is not a choice.
There is nowhere to get away from it,

who walks out of the water at sunset
shaking the drops off, it just flies open.
To be a whacher is not in itself sad or happy,

although she uses these words in her verse
grazing with euphemism the work of whaching.

But it has no name.
It is transparent.
Sometimes she calls it Thou.

records Charlotte in 1828.
Unsociable even at home

and unable to meet the eyes of strangers when she ventured out,
Emily made her awkward way
across days and years whose bareness appalls her biographers.

This sad stunted life, says one.
Uninteresting, unremarkable, wracked by disappointment
and despair, says another.

suggests a third. Meanwhile
Emily continued to brush into the carpet the question,

Why cast the world away.
For someone hooked up to Thou,
the world may have seemed a kind of half-finished sentence.

But in between the neighbour who recalls her
coming in from a walk on the moors

and the sister who tells us
Emily never made a friend in her life,
is a space where the little raw soul

slips through.
It goes skimming the deep keel like a storm petrel,
out of sight.

The little raw soul was caught by no one.
or a fear of death. She worked

in total six months of her life (at a school in Halifax)
and died on the sofa at home at 2 P.M. on a winter afternoon
in her thirty-first year. She spent

most of the hours of her life brushing the carpet,
1

Imagine a big room of women doing anything,
playing cards, having a meeting, the rattle
of paper or coffee cups or chairs pushed back,
the loud and quiet murmur of their voices,
women leaning their heads together. If we
leaned in at the door and I said, Those women
at me for pointing out the obvious fact.

Say we walked around to 8th or 11th Street
to drop in on a roomful of women, smiling, intense,
playing pool, the green baize like moss. One
Others dance by twos under twirling silver moons
that rain light down in glittering drops.
If I said in your ear, through metallic guitars,
would you? Not really, not even if you had come

what we say. In the clanging silence, pain falls
on our hearts, year in and out, like water cutting
a groove in stone, seeking a channel, a way out,
pain running like water through the glittering room.

2

I often think of a poem as a door that opens
into a room where I want to go. But to go in

here is to enter where my own suffering exists
as an almost unheard low note in the music,
amplified, almost unbearable, by the presence
of us all, reverberant pain, circular, endless,

which we speak of hardly at all, unless a woman
in the dim privacy tells me a story of her child
lost, now or twenty years ago, her words sliding
like a snapshot out of her billfold, faded outline
glanced at and away from, the story elliptic, oblique
to avoid the dangers of grief. The flashes of story
brilliant and grim as strobe lights in the dark,
the dance shown as grimace, head thrown back in pain.

Her skinny brown arms folded against her flat breasts,
And who would call her a mother?
Or tall pale Connie,
rainbow skirts twirling, her sailing-away plans, islands,
women plaiting straw with shells: Who would have known
until the night, head down on my shoulder, she cried out
for her children shoved behind the father, shadows
as she waited for them in the shriveled yard?

All the women caught in flaring light, glimpsed
in mystery: The red-lipped, red-fingertipped woman
who dances by, sparkling like fire, is she here on the sly,
The butch in black denim, elegant as ashes, her son
The quiet woman drinking gin, thinking of being sixteen,
the baby wrinkled as wet clothes, seen once, never again.

A few words, some gesture of our hands, some bit of story
cryptic as the mark gleaming on our hands, the ink
tattoo, the sign that admits us to this room, iridescent
in certain kinds of light, then vanishing, invisible.

3

played through four times with its sad lyric,
only half-heard in the noisy room, then done with,
I could write the poem I imagined: All the women
here see their lost children come into the dim room,
the lights brighten, we are in the happy ending,
no more hiding, we are ourselves and they are here
with us, a reconciliation, a commotion of voices.

Wanda. I have my own: the hammering at authority,
the years of driving round and round for a glimpse,
for anything, and finally the child, big, awkward,
comes with you, to walk somewhere arm in arm.

But things have been done to us that can never be
undone. The woman in the corner smiling at friends,
the one with black hair glinting white, remembers
The brown-eyed baby who flirted before she talked,
taken and sent away twenty years ago, no recourse.
If she stood in the door, the woman would not know her,
and the child would have no memory of the woman,
not of lying on her knees nor at her breast, leaving
a hidden mark, pain grooved and etched on the heart.

keep forgetting. Her story drifts away like smoke,
like vague words in a song, a paper scrap in the water.
When they talk about mothers, they never think of her.

No easy ending to this pain. At midnight we go home
to silent houses, or perhaps to clamorous rooms full
of those who are now our family. Perhaps we sit alone,
heavy with the past, and there are tears running bitter
and steady as rain in the night. Mostly we just go on.

uuuuuuuuuu
uuuuuuuuuu
I 
He did not wear his scarlet coat,
    For blood and wine are red,
And blood and wine were on his hands
    When they found him with the dead,
The poor dead woman whom he loved,
    And murdered in her bed.

He walked amongst the Trial Men
    In a suit of shabby gray;
A cricket cap was on his head,
    And his step seemed light and gay;
But I never saw a man who looked
    So wistfully at the day.

I never saw a man who looked
    With such a wistful eye
Upon that little tent of blue
    Which prisoners call the sky,
And at every drifting cloud that went
    With sails of silver by.

I walked, with other souls in pain,
    Within another ring,
And was wondering if the man had done
    A great or little thing,
When a voice behind me whispered low,
"That fellow's got to swing." 

Dear Christ! the very prison walls
    Suddenly seemed to reel,
And the sky above my head became
    Like a casque of scorching steel;
And, though I was a soul in pain,
    My pain I could not feel.

I only knew what hunted thought
    Quickened his step, and why
He looked upon the garish day
    With such a wistful eye;
The man had killed the thing he loved,
    And so he had to die.

Yet each man kills the thing he loves,
    By each let this be heard,
Some do it with a bitter look,
    Some with a flattering word,
The coward does it with a kiss,
    The brave man with a sword!

Some kill their love when they are young,
    And some when they are old;
Some strangle with the hands of Lust,
    Some with the hands of Gold:
The kindest use a knife, because
    The dead so soon grow cold.

Some love too little, some too long,
    Some sell, and others buy;
Some do the deed with many tears,
    And some without a sigh:
For each man kills the thing he loves,
    Yet each man does not die.

He does not die a death of shame
    On a day of dark disgrace,
Nor have a noose about his neck,
    Nor a cloth upon his face,
Nor drop feet foremost through the floor
    Into an empty space.

He does not sit with silent men
    Who watch him night and day;
Who watch him when he tries to weep,
    And when he tries to pray;
Who watch him lest himself should rob
    The prison of its prey.

He does not wake at dawn to see
    Dread figures throng his room,
The shivering Chaplain robed in white,
    The Sheriff stern with gloom,
And the Governor all in shiny black,
    With the yellow face of Doom.

He does not rise in piteous haste
    To put on convict-clothes,
While some coarse-mouthed Doctor gloats, and notes
    Each new and nerve-twitched pose,
Fingering a watch whose little ticks
    Are like horrible hammer-blows.

He does not know that sickening thirst
    That sands one's throat, before
The hangman with his gardener's gloves
    Slips through the padded door,
And binds one with three leathern thongs,
That the throat may thirst no more.

He does not bend his head to hear
    The Burial Office read,
Nor while the terror of his soul
    Tells him he is not dead,
Cross his own coffin, as he moves
    Into the hideous shed.

He does not stare upon the air
    Through a little roof of glass:
He does not pray with lips of clay
    For his agony to pass;
Nor feel upon his shuddering cheek
    The kiss of Caiaphas.

II 
Six weeks the guardsman walked the yard,
    In the suit of shabby gray:
His cricket cap was on his head,
    And his step seemed light and gay,
But I never saw a man who looked
    So wistfully at the day.

I never saw a man who looked
    With such a wistful eye
Upon that little tent of blue
    Which prisoners call the sky,
And at every wandering cloud that trailed
    Its ravelled fleeces by.

He did not wring his hands, as do
    Those witless men who dare
To try to rear the changeling Hope
    In the cave of black Despair:
He only looked upon the sun,
    And drank the morning air.

He did not wring his hands nor weep,
    Nor did he peek or pine,
But he drank the air as though it held
    Some healthful anodyne;
With open mouth he drank the sun
    As though it had been wine!

And I and all the souls in pain,
    Who tramped the other ring,
Forgot if we ourselves had done
    A great or little thing,
And watched with gaze of dull amaze
    The man who had to swing.

For strange it was to see him pass
    With a step so light and gay,
And strange it was to see him look
    So wistfully at the day,
And strange it was to think that he
    Had such a debt to pay.

For oak and elm have pleasant leaves
    That in the spring-time shoot:
But grim to see is the gallows-tree,
    With its alder-bitten root,
And, green or dry, a man must die
    Before it bears its fruit!

The loftiest place is that seat of grace
    For which all worldlings try:
But who would stand in hempen band
    Upon a scaffold high,
And through a murderer's collar take
    His last look at the sky?

It is sweet to dance to violins
    When Love and Life are fair:
To dance to flutes, to dance to lutes
    Is delicate and rare:
But it is not sweet with nimble feet
    To dance upon the air!

So with curious eyes and sick surmise
    We watched him day by day,
And wondered if each one of us
    Would end the self-same way,
For none can tell to what red Hell
    His sightless soul may stray.

At last the dead man walked no more
    Amongst the Trial Men,
And I knew that he was standing up
    In the black dock's dreadful pen,
And that never would I see his face
    In God's sweet world again.

Like two doomed ships that pass in storm
    We had crossed each other's way:
But we made no sign, we said no word,
    We had no word to say;
For we did not meet in the holy night,
    But in the shameful day.

A prison wall was round us both,
    Two outcast men we were:
The world had thrust us from its heart,

LO, praise of the prowess of people-kings
of spear-armed Danes, in days long sped,
we have heard, and what honor the athelings won!
Oft Scyld the Scefing from squadroned foes,
from many a tribe, the mead-bench tore,
awing the earls. Since erst he lay
friendless, a foundling, fate repaid him:
for he waxed under welkin, in wealth he throve,
till before him the folk, both far and near,
who house by the whale-path, heard his mandate,
gave him gifts: a good king he!
To him an heir was afterward born,
a son in his halls, whom heaven sent
to favor the folk, feeling their woe
that erst they had lacked an earl for leader
so long a while; the Lord endowed him,
Famed was this Beowulf: far flew the boast of him,
son of Scyld, in the Scandian lands.
So becomes it a youth to quit him well
that to aid him, aged, in after days,
come warriors willing, should war draw nigh,
liegemen loyal: by lauded deeds
shall an earl have honor in every clan.
Forth he fared at the fated moment,
sturdy Scyld to the shelter of God.
loving clansmen, as late he charged them,
while wielded words the winsome Scyld,
the leader beloved who long had ruled....
In the roadstead rocked a ring-dight vessel,
there laid they down their darling lord
by the mast the mighty one. Many a treasure
fetched from far was freighted with him.
No ship have I known so nobly dight
with weapons of war and weeds of battle,
with breastplate and blade: on his bosom lay
a heaped hoard that hence should go
No less these loaded the lordly gifts,
who in former time forth had sent him
sole on the seas, a suckling child.
a gold-wove banner; let billows take him,
gave him to ocean. Grave were their spirits,
mournful their mood. No man is able
to say in sooth, no son of the halls,
Now Beowulf bode in the burg of the Scyldings,
leader beloved, and long he ruled
in fame with all folk, since his father had gone
away from the world, till awoke an heir,
haughty Healfdene, who held through life,
sage and sturdy, the Scyldings glad.
Then, one after one, there woke to him,
to the chieftain of clansmen, children four:
Heorogar, then Hrothgar, then Halga brave;
To Hrothgar was given such glory of war,
such honor of combat, that all his kin
obeyed him gladly till great grew his band
of youthful comrades. It came in his mind
to bid his henchmen a hall uprear,
a master mead-house, mightier far
than ever was seen by the sons of earth,
and within it, then, to old and young
he would all allot that the Lord had sent him,
save only the land and the lives of his men.
Wide, I heard, was the work commanded,
for many a tribe this mid-earth round,
to fashion the folkstead. It fell, as he ordered,
in rapid achievement that ready it stood there,
whose message had might in many a land.
Not reckless of promise, the rings he dealt,
treasure at banquet: there towered the hall,
high, gabled wide, the hot surge waiting
when father and son-in-law stood in feud
With envy and anger an evil spirit
endured the dole in his dark abode,
that he heard each day the din of revel
high in the hall: there harps rang out,
clear song of the singer. He sang who knew
tales of the early time of man,
how the Almighty made the earth,
fairest fields enfolded by water,
set, triumphant, sun and moon
for a light to lighten the land-dwellers,
and braided bright the breast of earth
with limbs and leaves, made life for all
of mortal beings that breathe and move.
So lived the clansmen in cheer and revel
a winsome life, till one began
to fashion evils, that field of hell.
Grendel this monster grim was called,
march-riever mighty, in moorland living,
in fen and fastness; fief of the giants
the hapless wight a while had kept
since the Creator his exile doomed.
On kin of Cain was the killing avenged
by sovran God for slaughtered Abel.
Ill fared his feud, and far was he driven,
Of Cain awoke all that woful breed,
as well as the giants that warred with God
weary while: but their wage was paid them!
WENT he forth to find at fall of night
that haughty house, and heed wherever
the Ring-Danes, outrevelled, to rest had gone.
Found within it the atheling band
asleep after feasting and fearless of sorrow,
of human hardship. Unhallowed wight,
grim and greedy, he grasped betimes,
wrathful, reckless, from resting-places,
thirty of the thanes, and thence he rushed
fain of his fell spoil, faring homeward,
laden with slaughter, his lair to seek.
Then at the dawning, as day was breaking,
the might of Grendel to men was known;
then after wassail was wail uplifted,
loud moan in the morn. The mighty chief,
atheling excellent, unblithe sat,
labored in woe for the loss of his thanes,
when once had been traced the trail of the fiend,
spirit accurst: too cruel that sorrow,
too long, too loathsome. Not late the respite;
with night returning, anew began
ruthless murder; he recked no whit,
firm in his guilt, of the feud and crime.
They were easy to find who elsewhere sought
in room remote their rest at night,
far and fast who the fiend outran!
Thus ruled unrighteous and raged his fill
one against all; until empty stood
that lordly building, and long it bode so.
sovran of Scyldings, sorrows in plenty,
boundless cares. There came unhidden
tidings true to the tribes of men,
in sorrowful songs, how ceaselessly Grendel
harassed Hrothgar, what hate he bore him,
what murder and massacre, many a year,
make pact of peace, or compound for gold:
still less did the wise men ween to get
great fee for the feud from his fiendish hands.
But the evil one ambushed old and young
death-shadow dark, and dogged them still,
lured, or lurked in the livelong night
of misty moorlands: men may say not
Such heaping of horrors the hater of men,
lonely roamer, wrought unceasing,
gold-bright hall, in gloomy nights;
heart-rending misery. Many nobles
sat assembled, and searched out counsel
how it were best for bold-hearted men
against harassing terror to try their hand.
Whiles they vowed in their heathen fanes
that the slayer-of-souls would succor give them
for the pain of their people. Their practice this,
in mood of their mind. Almighty they knew not,
Doomsman of Deeds and dreadful Lord,
who in harm and hatred hales his soul
awaits he ever. But well for him
that after death-day may draw to his Lord,
THUS seethed unceasing the son of Healfdene
with the woe of these days; not wisest men
assuaged his sorrow; too sore the anguish,
loathly and long, that lay on his folk,
most baneful of burdens and bales of the night.
He was the mightiest man of valor
in that same day of this our life,
stalwart and stately. A stout wave-walker
he bade make ready. Yon battle-king, said he,
the noble monarch who needed men!

Then all one day because of ice
they couldn't make it down the hill.
Or up, James says,
dabbing at a spill
of coffee, crunching toast as if it had a spine.
But he could work, at any rate,
could concentrate
on that book he's been reading,
or meaning to,
some smoldering fact
he's found in the cold ash of some war.
Gusting upward, lobes and nose on fire,
his whole face florid
from the heart attack
he's somehow never had,
he sways, repeating:
Oh, we'd get down just fine,
I expect, but we'd never make it back,
then goes into his room and shuts the door.

Eva's hours have nearer ends.
She heats the little disk the cat sleeps on;
chips, until her hands are gone,
the glaze off all the feeders for the birds;
then writes two friends
to thank them for the birthday chocolates they've sent.
The word alone makes her stomach burn.
Which is mostly what age is, she's learned,
the senses sharpening backwards,
keen to what they can't perceive,
when to be wise means mostly not to wish
for what you love,
for what you love is pain:
spices or coffee, gin
bringing the evening light into your veins,
good chocolates the grandkids ravish
like a horde of crows.
You stuff your bellies with tomorrow's ache,
she can almost hear him bellow,
nipping and pinching to make them squeal.
Hot water with honey, one coddled egg, dry saltines:
Oh, what difference does it make?
She picks up the chocolates, breaks
the seal.
 

He draws the blinds on a wall of glass,
winces at the glare,
drags his chair
into the bright crevasse
between his bed and bookshelf,
takes a deep breath of air,
and buries himself
in one of the early wordy furies
of William Gladstone,
never a man for minor keys.
Creak and tick of the burdened limbs.
A creak and tick inside of him
as he crosses his legs and then uncrosses them,
shifts his weight to ease
the stiffness in one side,
turns a page like a summit he has climbed,
and breathes...
in Gladstone's life, and of his own
enough to keep an army of bibliographers occupied;
a whole age and empire crammed into one man:
spellbinding crowds until he couldn't stand,
felling his million trees,
filling six decades' worth of diaries
because a life is owed as well as owned, time
a gift of which a good man gives account;
who would mount,
night after night, a moral, high-rhetorical siege
upon some poor Haymarket tart
in whom ruin
and beauty were one word,
then go home and whip himself for a sin
that, all the evidence suggests, never occurred
but in his heart.
 

And has just one,
pleasure spreading through her blood like a single drop
of ink.
She scours the stove and countertop,
bleaches coffee stains off the sink,
cleans leaf by leaf
the emerald ripple and the paradise palm,
both mostly dormant now,
reaches high for the philodendron, huge since trained to climb,
and pauses,
remembering the calm
a beauty, men said, though it hardly seemed
a part of her, looking out of her own face
like someone on a train;
and remembering, too,
the child-high hedgerows
alone the lane
behind their house on Paddox Close,
the slice of sky above
growing wider as she grew,
the little park with its central statue
(who was it of?),
which, last time she'd seen,
weather had worried
to a Swedish ivy sort of green.
 

even the names of those women are there
amid the parliamentary proceedings,
bulldog scholarship, affairs
of state.
He lifts his hand like a weight
to check his watch, little trembles traveling through his bones
into the air
as through plucked strings
a sound.
Two hours until the final round
at Palm Springs,
with its hairpin fairways, lacquered greens,
and that great eighteenth in homage
to Bobby Jones.
retired at twenty-eight
with nothing left to win,
at forty storming Normandy with men
half his age.
without a trace of self-pity, regret, rage:
We all have to play the ball as it lies.
How much of a man's revealed in how he dies...
Poor Owen, barely sixty, Dean of the College,
a decent book on Kant behind him:
two days of chest pain
slivering into a lifetime's knowledge
and all the old beliefs
come flooding back,
silly relics and rituals, griefs
you're born into, some guilt you can't even name.
"Ischemia," that's exactly right: blood lack.
 

Sweet pickles and white bread,
salted ham,
a soybean spread
that is his one concession to his heart,
two butter cookies, plum jam:
she clicks
across the polished floor
through motes that rise
and float like molecules of light,
pausing outside his door,
hearing the Mahler chorus to which he always cries,
plays to cry, she suspects,
as if even sadness could be planned.
She takes the knob in her hand,
sees, inside its shine,
white tablecloths, crystal cut fine
as jewels,
and, and... and a man
with American shoulders and vowels,
that face
so open it wasn't, like the ocean,
and that tidal way he had of filling any space
that wasn't taken,
the table where she sat with friends,
afternoons and weekends,
classrooms, boardrooms, lecture halls,
the very bodies of their children,
in whose broad limbs he seems to sprawl.
Was that what she had fallen for,
talk of golf, and Oxford, and roast beef
in that gray decade after the war,
that it seemed so safe
a fall?
 

and that woman's whole soul
is in her throat...
A home can have but one composer.
Wasn't that the quote?
That long ironclad letter Mahler wrote
to Alma, the most exquisite
woman in Vienna, who packed
away that cold contract,
her party dresses, and her own precocious technique,
and settled, if you could call it that,
into the role
I am inside someone
who hates me. I look
out from his eyes. Smell
what fouled tunes come in
to his breath. Love his
wretched women.

Slits in the metal, for sun. Where
my eyes sit turning, at the cool air
the glance of light, or hard flesh
rubbed against me, a woman, a man,
without shadow, or voice, or meaning.

This is the enclosure (flesh,
where innocence is a weapon. An
abstraction. Touch. (Not mine.
Or yours, if you are the soul I had
and abandoned when I was blind and had
my enemies carry me as a dead man
(if he is beautiful, or pitied.

It can be pain. (As now, as all his
flesh hurts me.) It can be that. Or
pain. As when she ran from me into
that forest.
silver spiraled whirled against the
sun, higher than even old men thought
God would be. Or pain. And the other. The
yes. (Inside his books, his fingers. They
are withered yellow flowers and were never
beautiful.) The yes. You will, lost soul, say
slow river. A white sun in its wet sentences.

Or, the cold men in their gale. Ecstasy. Flesh
or soul. The yes. (Their robes blown. Their bowls
empty. They chant at my heels, not at yours.) Flesh
or soul, as corrupt. Where the answer moves too quickly.
Where the God is a self, after all.)

Cold air blown through narrow blind eyes. Flesh,
white hot metal. Glows as the day with its sun.
It is a human love, I live inside. A bony skeleton
you recognize as words or simple feeling.

But it has no feeling. As the metal, is hot, it is not,
given to love.

It burns the thing
inside it. And that thing
screams.

Who will you point to? In the needle's eye,
or selling what you won at the strait gate,
who will know how to kiss you and just when
to pull the hair at your neck and say your name?
No single victim will ever be the last.
Not, at least, until one victim purifies
the whole issue of suffering
by crying out that his pain means nothing
because it comes from nowhere and goes nowhere.
The clusters of exiles in their storefronts
will be free then. History will end.
Lover will take her hand from her lover's mouth
and see only his mouth, not a sightless
fish's eye scored onto the sheet's marble.

It's a wise child who knows it is no angel.
The rest of us grow up hovering, visiting
our lives in the moment of pain or orgasm
or when the little fingers of pity push
inside us and we feel loved. Our suffering
gales beneath our wings like applause.
We long to repeat it, to explain it
to stay aloft and clear our lives in that
mid-heaven of nostalgia and apology.
We hover over the camps, the forced retreats,
the ends of nations that no one can recall now
except as code words for catastrophe.
We alight for pleasure, touching the victims
as the hurt husband touches the bed his wife has left.

Father loved you with a passion. Or else
from fear of your long, inarticulate future,
he turned silent, edging into crank broadcasts
by a small radio on the screened porch.
Perhaps, as my father did, he moved out
into another house and had a daughter
with a redheaded woman who mistook his silence
for grief. My father never lost anything.
For years, I went to school with the daughter
as she grew fat and her red hair reached her knees.
Who were the victims? At what moment
should my father have cried out, the mothers
have cried out, or I have taken the fat hand
of my sister and walked off through the needle's eye?

And it's a wise child who can understand
that the mothers and fathers on the trains
see only the receding pastorals,
the lamplit villages of other angels,
and that his suffering is only one pinpoint
on a lithic hoarding of departures
each passenger reads like an advertisement of heaven.
The wise child goes crazy. How could he not?
How could he not be heartbroken to learn
that even compassion is compassionless, that it uses
the real or imagined pain of others and himself
for wings, for memory, for a marriage proposal,
for the cruel angelism that adores victims
and makes a fifth, airier element out of pain?

We recede. We recede. A virus finds
that place deepest behind the heart where it
unweaves itself into a pattern of false starts
like knots of villages and the one house
lightening at the crest of a green street
as its doors close to us. Dearest,
that is another crime of pluralism.
Hope, jagged with beginnings, scatters
our one real life among a dozen houses,
little illnesses of longing whose low
fevers contract the heart. You have but one heart.
And I have one. At the crest of a green street
we give them away. The night thanks us.
The fences shiver with cats, and the flowers close.

Feeling comes from nowhere and goes nowhere.
It is not a train. It is not one instance
of lovemaking or a lifetime spent together
running the dogs, dying finally face down
in the yard bed of herbs. We are all the same.
Or, rather, we should believe we are the same
in order to be happy with the same things
and not to be stealing from each other.
We put each other in camps. I crush my lover with a kiss
and then it is impossible to love her.
What must die if we are to live without barbed wire
And to kill the idea, we have merely to find
one victim in ourselves who will die for nothing.

My father could not stop getting children.
The people on the trains cannot stop watching
the passing villages for their own ghosts
and early angels. I cannot stop finding
houses in which to lose my heart a dozen times
in the fits and starts of a little passion exalted.
Life is not going to be bearable, I think,
for a long time. The exiles will play cards
in their storefront lodges. History will slide on.
And one will pull the hair at my neck. And one
will cover my mouth as she makes love to me.
The streets are snowed in under heaven's leaflets.
Our beds are scored with the sightless eyes, the eyes of others.
The air is sickeningly heavy with applause.

The poet is a man who feigns
And feigns so thoroughly, at last
He manages to feign as pain
The pain he really feels,

And those who read what once he wrote
Feel clearly, in the pain they read,
Neither of the pains he felt,
Only a pain they cannot sense.

And thus, around its jolting track
There runs, to keep our reason busy,
The circling clockwork train of ours
That men agree to call a heart.

To those who kiss in fear that they shall never kiss again

To those that love with fear that they shall never love again

To such I dedicate this rhyme and what it may contain.

None of us will ever take the transiberian train

Which makes a very satisfactory refrain

Especially as I can repeat it over and over again

Which is the main use of the refrain.

I with no middle flight intend the truth to speak out plain
Of honour truth and love gone by that has come back again
The fact is one grows weary of the love that comes again.
I may not know much about gods but I know that
Eros is a strong purple god.
And that there is a point where incest becomes
We have been mutually avoiding each other
For years and will continue to do so.
Something. The word you want is Dante.
He said he loved Beatrice. Whatever he did
Beatrice Portinari whom history gives.
He knew her and the point about all these
Florentines is that they all were
Killing each other or dying of rapid
Consumption. Beatrice died; Rossetti painted her
Cutting Dante in the street. Botticelli
Painted the rest: Simonetta Vespucci
Died of a rapid consumption (age 23)
Giuliano dei Medici murdered by the altar rail (age 19)
Guido Cavalcanti died in exile (age 35)
Dante dei Aligeri died in exile (age 90)
Lorenzo dei Medici who lives for ever
Since he stayed there and commissioned
The paintings, and poems and statues
And if he also commissioned the deaths
Very magnificent when his brother
Was murdered in sanctuary.
Do you realise whoever did that
Would be excommunicated if, that is, if
His best friend.
I have lived long enough having seen one thing;
That term has an end.
It was getting dark on the platform of nowhere
When I who was anxious and sad came to you
Out of the rain. Out of the sound of the cold
Wind that blows time before and time after
Even Provence knows.
And as for this line I stole it from T.S. Eliot
And Ezra Pound and A.C. Swinburne. All very good
Poets to steal from since they are all three dead.
The love that is must always just contain
The glory of the love that was whatever be the pain.
We played at mates and mating and stopped up the drain.
Hear me. O Mister Poster I know
You have burnt me too brown you must boil me again
You simply have no notion how delightful it will
Be when they pick us up and throw us with the lobsters out to sea.
It is the lark, my love, and not the nightingale.
None of us will ever take the trans-siberian train.
She wanted to and was collecting people who did
It is the lark, my love, and not the nightingale.
But people say they sound very similar.
And what the devil were Romeo and Juliet
About wasting their last moments
Listening to birds. Hah.
I like kicking up larks or
Larking up kicks. So do most poets
Including J.H. Prynne, the memorable poet
Who is happy to say that the U.L.
Has got his middle name wrong.
He claims it stands for Hah
But there is a limit. I know it all.
Riddle me riddle randy ree
Round and round in the snotgreen sea
When they pick us up and throw us
With the Joyces out to sea.
We all would have liked to have been there.
The infernal Odyssos. He it was whose bile
Stirred up by envy and revenge destroyed
The mother of womankind. And Swinburne
I just get kicked.
Except that if I don't I tend to sound
Like Richard the Second. And who wants that.
I suppose I must sound like Richard the First.
What did he do?
Nothing I take it
I get a kick out of larking up nightingales.
Safe from Sicily by the thirtieth April
They will send a posse.
March is the cruellest station
Taking on bullying men
And were you really afraid they would rape you?
No. I thought there would be grave difficulties.
Not just that I was actively opposed
And so was every other man, woman and child
On that there train.
I was afraid they would kill me.
So simple as to think your name
Is Elizabeth Brown. Well. All right
My name is Veronica Forrest-Thomson.
Agamemnon was King of the Achaians at the time,
Priam, of the Trojans, Theseus, of the Athenians.
And like all Good Kings, they are dead.
In my day it was the done thing to side
With the Trojans for no better reason
Than that they lost. But me I back
Winners every time.
Mary Shelley may go to hell
As she thought she was going to anyway
And take Frankinsense with her.
I want her husband, alive and well.
Who, of course, also got killed.
Hardly surprising if he made a habit
Of reading Aiscylos while sailing.
Got cremated like a pagan king.
Not Agamemnon who, as I said, was king at the time
And lost, murderer of his daughter
Killed by his wife and (other) daughter.
Killed by his death killing his life.
Stabbed in the back in his bath.
I think of it every time I have a bath.
Though I have no sympathy at all
For that daughter and son.
I think it is unfair that Helen
Had everything, immortal beauty,
Lovers, cities destroyed and battles
Fought about her. And she just came home
And calmly went around being Menelaus' wife
While her twin sister, Clytemnestra
Was murdered by her son and daughter.
And the Athenians acquitted them.
They would do, a nation of sophists.
Always betraying their allies and torturing
Women and children and enslaving people.
They even killed Socrates, their one good man,
Then Plato tried to be a philosopher king.
And got enslaved for his pains.
I wish they had kept him enslaved.
He escaped, of course, and wrote books
About how he would do it better
If he was in charge. All poets do that.
They are just as incompetent as the rest
If they try to organise things.
As witness my own efforts in that direction
Or those of my avatar, Agamemnon,
Who, as I say came home and was killed in his bath
Killing his wife and his daughter.
Read it in the Iliad, read it in the Odyssey,
Do not read it in Freud who is always wrong
But first and last read me, the beloved
Who was killed in the general slaughter.
But rise again like John Donne
(read him too) I, Helen, I Iseult, I Guenevere,
I Clytemnestra and many more to come.
I did it, I myself, killing the King my father
Killing the King my mother, joining the King my brother.
It is the kick, my love, and not the nightingale
I like larking up kicks myself
But not kicking.
They that have power to hurt and do so
Should not be blamed by Shakespeare or anyone else
For hurting though such is the race of poets
That they will blame them anyway.
However it is a pretty productive process
Especially if one may be plumber as well as poet
And thus unstop the drain as well as writing
Several other books and poems including
1974 and All That (seriously though)
I, Veronica did it, truth-finding, truth-seeking
Muck-raking, bringing victory.
It was a horse, of course, in which the warriors hid
Pretending to bring peace
Like a lot of fools, hearing the voice of the goddess
In an alien city, I speak your tongue in my own city:
Advised, of course, by Odyssos, solicitor, betrayer.
And when they had killed all the men, raped all the women etc.
Agamemnon came home and, as I said, was stabbed by his wife
In his bath. Anyway it is the lark, my love,
And not the nightingale. I follow the sacred footsteps of
Hippolyta, the blest, the best
That has been said or spoken well in any tongue
I am not Prince Thomas Aquinas F.H. Eliot
I am not an attendant lord either.
I am the king who lives.
Spring surprised us, running through the market square
And went on in sunlight into the University Library
And ate yogurt and talked for an hour.
You, You, grab the reins.
Drink as much as you can and love as much as you can
And work as much as you can
The motto of this poem heed
And do you it employ:
The possibles of joy.

Scene Two
Scene Five

on the eleventh day after dead
[Silence]
[day 15]
i wonder wha appen to im bicycle? i wonder whe um is?
I am the centre
Of a circle of pain
Exceeding its boundaries in every direction

The business of the bland sun
Has no affair with me
In my congested cosmos of agony
From which there is no escape
On infinitely prolonged nerve-vibrations
Or in contraction
To the pinpoint nucleus of being

It is without
The sensitized area
Of intension

I am the false quantity
In the harmony of physiological potentiality
To which
Gaining self-control
I should be consonant
In time

Pain is no stronger than the resisting force
Pain calls up in me
The struggle is equal

The open window is full of a voice
A fashionable portrait painter
Sings
At the back of the thoughts to which I permit crystallization
Why?
Leaves woman her superior Inferiority.
He is running upstairs

I am climbing a distorted mountain of agony
Incidentally with the exhaustion of control
I reach the summit
And gradually subside into anticipation of

Repose
Which never comes.
For another mountain is growing up
I must traverse
Traversing myself

Something in the delirium of night hours
Confuses while intensifying sensibility
Blurring spatial contours
So aiding elusion of the circumscribed
That the gurgling of a crucified wild beast
Comes from so far away
And the foam on the stretched muscles of a mouth
Is no part of myself
There is a climax in sensibility
When pain surpassing itself
Becomes exotic
Uniting the opposing and resisting forces
In lascivious revelation

Relaxation
Negation of myself as a unit
I should have been emptied of life
Giving life

Through the subliminal deposits of evolutionary processes

Have I not
Somewhere
Scrutinized
A dead white feathered moth
Laying eggs?
A moment
Being realization
Can
Vitalized by cosmic initiation
Furnish an adequate apology
For the objective
Agglomeration of activities
Of a life
LIFE
A leap with nature
Into the essence
Of unpredicted Maternity
Against my thigh
Tough of infinitesimal motion
Scarcely perceptible
Undulation
Stir of incipient life
Precipitating into me

The contents of the universe
Mother I am
Identical
With infinite Maternity
Of cosmic reproductivity

Rises from the subconscious
Impression of a cat
With blind kittens
Among her legs
Same undulating life-stir
I am that cat

Rises from the sub-conscious
Impression of small animal carcass
Covered with blue bottles
And through the insects
Waves that same undulation of living
Death
Life
I am knowing
All about

The next morning
Each woman-of-the-people
Tiptoeing the red pile of the carpet
Doing hushed service
Each woman-of-the-people
Wearing a halo
A ludicrous little halo
Of which she is sublimely unaware

I once heard in a church

into the innermost space

I looked at Turnbull and saw set under his browas I looked him up and down twice 
as I looked him up and down twice

 Translated from the Irish
 Translated from the Irish
Ah! What avails the classic bent  
Against the undoctored incident  

And what is Art whereto we press  
When Nature in her nakedness 

It is not learning, grace nor gear, 
But bitter pinch of pain and fear 

The longest arm, the sharpest tooth,  

Till, bruised and bitten to the bone 
He learned to deal the far-off stone, 

So tooth and nail were obsolete  
Till, bored by uniform defeat,  

Then stone and javelin proved as vain  
Till, spurred anew by fear and pain,  

Then was there safety for the rich  
Till someone mixed a powder which 

Helmet and armour disappeared 
And, when the smoke of battle cleared, 

And when ten million such were slain  
Man, schooled in bulk by fear and pain,  

And, at the very hour designed 
His tooth-stone-arrow-gun-shy mind  

All Power, each Tyrant, every Mob 
Ends by destroying its own job 

And Man, whose mere necessities 
Trembles meanwhile at their decrees, 

Before our lives divide for ever, 
(Time, swift to fasten and swift to sever 
I will say no word that a man might say 
Whose whole life's love goes down in a day; 
For this could never have been; and never, 

Is it worth a tear, is it worth an hour, 
Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower, 
Though joy be done with and grief be vain, 
Time shall not sever us wholly in twain; 
Earth is not spoilt for a single shower; 

It will grow not again, this fruit of my heart, 
The singing seasons divide and depart, 
It will grow not again, it is ruined at root, 
The bloodlike blossom, the dull red fruit; 
Though the heart yet sickens, the lips yet smart, 

I have given no man of my fruit to eat; 
Had you eaten and drunken and found it sweet, 
This wine and bread without lees or leaven, 
We had grown as gods, as the gods in heaven, 
Souls fair to look upon, goodly to greet, 

In the change of years, in the coil of things, 
We, drinking love at the furthest springs, 
We had grown as gods, as the gods above, 
Filled from the heart to the lips with love, 
Held fast in his hands, clothed warm with his wings, 

We had stood as the sure stars stand, and moved 
Grief collapse as a thing disproved, 
Twain halves of a perfect heart, made fast 
Soul to soul while the years fell past; 
Had you loved me once, as you have not loved; 

I have put my days and dreams out of mind, 
Though we seek life through, we shall surely find 
But clear are these things; the grass and the sand, 
Where, sure as the eyes reach, ever at hand, 
With lips wide open and face burnt blind, 

The low downs lean to the sea; the stream, 
Rapid and vivid and dumb as a dream, 
No wind is rough with the rank rare flowers; 
The sweet sea, mother of loves and hours, 
Shudders and shines as the grey winds gleam, 

Mother of loves that are swift to fade, 
A barren mother, a mother-maid, 
I would we twain were even as she, 
Lost in the night and the light of the sea, 
Where faint sounds falter and wan beams wade, 

The loves and hours of the life of a man, 
Hours that rejoice and regret for a span, 
Loves that are lost ere they come to birth, 
Weeds of the wave, without fruit upon earth. 
I lose what I long for, save what I can, 

It is not much that a man can save 
Who swims in sight of the great third wave 
Some waif washed up with the strays and spars 
That ebb-tide shows to the shore and the stars; 
Weed from the water, grass from a grave, 

There will no man do for your sake, I think, 
I had wrung life dry for your lips to drink, 
Body for body and blood for blood, 
As the flow of the full sea risen to flood 
That yearns and trembles before it sink, 

Yea, hope at highest and all her fruit, 
I had given you surely, and life to boot, 
But now, you are twain, you are cloven apart, 
Flesh of his flesh, but heart of my heart; 
And deep in one is the bitter root, 

To have died if you cared I should die for you, clung 
Than shafts of love or arrows of death; 
These were but as fire is, dust, or breath, 
Or poisonous foam on the tender tongue 

I wish we were dead together to-day, 
Clasped and clothed in the cloven clay, 
Out of the ages of worldly weather, 
Forgotten of all men altogether, 
As the world's first dead, taken wholly away, 

How we should slumber, how we should sleep, 
And dreaming, grow to each other, and weep, 
Yea, and it may be, struck through by the dream, 
Feel the dust quicken and quiver, and seem 
Alive as of old to the lips, and leap 

Sick dreams and sad of a dull delight; 
To have dreamed, to have loved with the whole soul's might, 
Let come what will, there is one thing worth, 
To have had fair love in the life upon earth: 
To have held love safe till the day grew night, 

Would I lose you now? would I take you then, 
And come what may after death to men, 
Lose life, lose all; but at least I know, 
O sweet life's love, having loved you so, 
Had I reached you on earth, I should lose not again, 

Yea, I know this well: were you once sealed mine, 
Mixed into me as honey in wine, 
Nor all strong things had severed us then; 
Not wrath of gods, nor wisdom of men, 
Nor all things earthly, nor all divine, 

I had grown pure as the dawn and the dew, 
But none shall triumph a whole life through: 
At the door of life, by the gate of breath, 
There are worse things waiting for men than death; 
Death could not sever my soul and you, 

You have chosen and clung to the chance they sent you, 
But will it not one day in heaven repent you? 
Will you lift up your eyes between sadness and bliss, 
Meet mine, and see where the great love is, 
And tremble and turn and be changed? Content you; 

But you, had you chosen, had you stretched hand, 
I too might have stood with the souls that stand 
But who now on earth need care how I live? 
Have the high gods anything left to give, 
Save dust and laurels and gold and sand? 

O all fair lovers about the world, 
My thoughts are as dead things, wrecked and whirled 
Is there a sound? There is a forest.
What is the world? The word is wilderness.
What is the answer? The answer is the world.
What is the beginning? A beginning is happiness.
What is the end? No one lives there now.
What is a beginning? The beginning is light.
What makes happiness? Nothing.
What makes an ending? What does not.
What is her skin?  Her skin is composed of strange clothing and clouds of butterflies,
What makes a question? Birds in the evening.
When do birds die? When it is complete.
What makes a world? The leaves shimmer in the wind, they
What is music? A man lives there with his sister, they count the buses passing
Who is happy? Nothing is necessary, everything that is is.
When does it end? A green delight the wounded mind endears
What is the beginning? The completion.
How does it complicate? In that it dazzles.
When does it matter? Blue loaves of dusk.
Who listens? There will be prizes.
What is a child? Blue lives of dusk.
Where does dust come from? From tropical skies.
What does a child do? Listens with his body, with her body.
When does it end? Listens with the hands.
Does it end? The hands which are small and wide.
Where do children come from? White pebbles.
Who suffers? No one returns from there.
Who suffers? There was once a small forest with a path of white pebbles
Is there a sound? There is a forest.
Who listens? Another theory of the origin of the universe holds that
What matters? There is a forest.
What does the child think? The child.
What does the child think? Happiness.
What child? A word is a small part of itself, it is round at times, and it satisfies
Does it answer? It does not.
What is pain? A man turns and locks his door with exactly the same small
Who suffers? Oh, it is true, there are causes of cruelty, it is that kind of world.
What is geometry? It is how we know, and what.
What is the purpose of memory? Blue lines of dust.
Does the child suffer? The child is suffering.
Is the child cruel? The child crushes the world at will, the child destroys
What is to crush?

At home, in my flannel gown, like a bear to its floe,
I clambered to bed; up the globe's impossible sides
My furs and my dogs, I stood at the northern pole.

There in the childish night my companions lay frozen,
The stiff furs knocked at my starveling throat,
And I gave my great sigh: the flakes came huddling,
Were they really my end? In the darkness I turned to my rest.

Of the unbroken ice. I stand here,
The dogs bark, my beard is black, and I stare
At the North Pole . . .

Turn as I please, my step is to the south.
Of cold and wretchedness: all lines, all winds
End in this whirlpool I at last discover.

And it is meaningless. In the child's bed
After the night's voyage, in that warm world
Where people work and suffer for the end

I reached my North and it had meaning.
Here at the actual pole of my existence,
Where all that I have done is meaningless,

Where, living or dying, I am still alone;
Here where North, the night, the berg of death
Crowd me out of the ignorant darkness,
I see at last that all the knowledge
Is worthless as ignorance: nothing comes from nothing,
And we call it wisdom. It is pain.

And the dead man was sick with sorrow
and his flesh wasted away
and his pale lips ate back from his mouth
and his teeth were bared in a base grin.

And the man tore from his face the grin
and there underneath it rose a chortling.

Life, dreams are of flesh. Now

Without tears and sorrow and without waving a hanky
bones took their leave of the dead man, from the one body
and left, each bone on its solitary journey.
lose touch with the pain that gave them birth,
and set sail in the air, playful gusts of sound,
so the bones quit the body of the dead man
to roll an independent roll through the ground.

And the dead man continually shrank, and continually shriveled,
bit by bit of him was lost.
The leg detached from the body and went its way
and became a separate entity.
The hands left one another and became estranged,
what are you to me, we were sisters,
two gray spinsters, hard bitten,
falling apart is something we can manage to do alone.

Indeed, the mesh of bone is tough, you will not melt it
with longings and memories; another world, hard and strange
hides beneath our flesh; bone does not love
does not remember, not women 
and not the light of the sun, with a rubbing sound
like the sound of porcelain scratching,
it crumbles and with the knock of breaking bones
the living form recedes and is forgotten.

Goodbye legs, goodbye hands, goodbye hip sockets and spare ribs,
goodbye spine and collar bone, goodbye all of you
we knew together a kind of rickety ensemble good for taking pains
that bore on it with a sigh a sackful of hanks of meat
for Christmas; Christmas is past, the meat consumed
fall in autumn, so our body loses its leaves.

And of the dead man just a little ball of skull is left,
and in it four holes packed and bunged with earth
and since the flesh of lips is all eaten and his teeth bared to the end,
and from between bared jaws, as from a broken urn, a last grin blossoms
for is it not a horrified grin, in the skull of death.

that all his forefathers grinned at him (and he joined in
watching the crowd of the dead, and waits expectantly
and they all lay, a field strewn with skulls,
each man a skull deaf and dumb
fastened into the earth and gazing up into the night sky.

winking at the magnificence of the universe and its secret,
winking at the horrors of death and its terrors.

And firmament looks at firmament, as in a funhouse mirror.
And a man all bent, that goes home alone at night,
seeking a fitting mirror to the burden of his life,
and it has no secret, only a piercing pain
and it has no riddle, only a laughable solution,
and there is no dome of blue, only a peel of mockery
where score upon score of horrified grins
shine gleaming from the lower firmament,

Indeed, it seems shame has no end,
as if death put paid to everything
and only left the insult that wriggles.
And as it grows darker, and there was a dark there
inside of darkness, and as the dead man dies further
and gets lesser, fainter, and crumbles
so the shame magnifies.

And as one who shuts his eyes and squints in the darkness with great effort
suddenly sees colorful stains of light,
so, in the darkness of his adopted death, the dead man sees
the piercing shards of laughter, its cutting leaps,
so hurtful, that there is nothing like it in the embraces of joy
and all the wreath of these colors was not created
except to decorate the pain of our shame.

And at the end of many years, when even the skull is fallen away
and become flakes of dust, the wind
with a whistle of contempt will cast them out
to every part, and still will be borne with them the sound 
of the cry of the dead man,
a moan so great as to never pass:
Hey, you up there, I was here too!

Home goes the tired ass, 
the lights go out slow,
whoever cried out in his sleep 
in his cradle of earth sank, mute.

With his ass and cart Messiah crawls

Why did my parents send me to the schools
That I with knowledge might enrich my mind?
Since the desire to know first made men fools,
And did corrupt the root of all mankind.
For when God's hand had written in the hearts
Of the first parents all the rules of good,
So that their skill infused did pass all arts
That ever were, before or since the flood,
And when their reason's eye was sharp and clear,
And, as an eagle can behold the sun,
Could have approached th'eternal light as near
As the intellectual angels could have done,
Even then to them the spirit of lies suggests
That they were blind, because they saw not ill,
And breathes into their incorrupted breasts
A curious wish, which did corrupt their will.
For that same ill they straight desired to know;
Which ill, being nought but a defect of good,
And all God's works the devil could not show
While man their lord in his perfection stood.
So that themselves were first to do the ill,
Ere they thereof the knowledge could attain;
Like him that knew not poison's power to kill,
Until, by tasting it, himself was slain.
Even so by tasting of that fruit forbid,
Where they sought knowledge, they did error find;
Ill they desired to know, and ill they did,
And to give passion eyes, made reason blind.
For then their minds did first in passion see
Those wretched shapes of misery and woe,
Of nakedness, of shame, of poverty,
Which then their own experience made them know.
But then grew reason dark, that she no more
Could the fair forms of good and truth discern;
Bats they became, that eagles were before,
And this they got by their desire to learn.
But we, their wretched offspring, what do we?
Do not we still taste of the fruit forbid,
Whiles with fond fruitless curiosity
In books profane we seek for knowledge hid?
What is this knowledge but the sky-stolen fire
For which the thief still chained in ice doth sit,
And which the poor rude satyr did admire,
And needs would kiss, but burnt his lips with it.
What is it but the cloud of empty rain,
Which when Jove's guest embraced, he monsters got?
Or the false pails which oft being filled with pain,
Received the water, but retained it not?
Shortly, what is it but the fiery coach
Which the youth sought, and sought his death withal?
Or the boy's wings, which when he did approach
The sun's hot beams, did melt and let him fall?
And yet, alas, when all our lamps are burned,
Our bodies waste, and our spirits spent,
When we have all the learned volumes turned,
Which yield men's wits both help and ornament,
What can we know, or what can we discern,
When error chokes the windows of the mind,
The diverse forms of things, how can we learn,
That have been ever from our birthday blind?
When reason's lamp, which like the sun in sky,
Throughout man's little world her beams did spread,
Is now become a sparkle which doth lie
Under the ashes, half extinct and dead;
How can we hope that through the eye and ear
This dying sparkle, in this cloudy place,
Can recollect these beams of knowledge clear,
Which were infused in the first minds by grace?
So might the heir whose father hath in play
Wasted a thousand pound of ancient rent,
By painful earning of a groat a day
Hope to restore the patrimony spent.
The wits that dived most deep and soared most high,
Seeking man's powers, have found his weakness such;
Skill comes so slow and life so fast doth fly,
We learn so little and forget so much.
For this the wisest of all mortal men
Said, He knew nought but that he nought did know;
And the great mocking master mocked not then,
When he said, Truth was buried deep below.
For how may we to others' things attain,
When none of us his own soul understands?
For which the devil mocks our curious brain,
When, Know thyself, his oracle commands.
For why should we the busy soul believe,
When boldly she concludes of that and this;
When of herself she can no judgment give,
Nor how, nor whence, nor where, nor what she is?
All things without, which round about we see,
We seek to know, and how therewith to do;
But that whereby we reason, live, and be,
Within ourselves we strangers are thereto.
We seek to know the moving of each sphere,
And the strange cause of th'ebbs and floods of Nile;
But of that clock within our breasts we bear,
The subtle motions we forget the while.
We that acquaint ourselves with every zone,
And pass both tropics and behold the poles,
When we come home, are to ourselves unknown,
And unacquainted still with our own souls.
We study speech, but others we persuade;
We leech-craft learn, but others cure with it;
We interpret laws, which other men have made,
But read not those which in our hearts are writ.
Is it because the mind is like the eye,
Through which it gathers knowledge by degrees--
Whose rays reflect not, but spread outwardly--
Not seeing itself when other things it sees?
No, doubtless, for the mind can backward cast
Upon herself her understanding light;
But she is so corrupt and so defaced,
As her own image doth herself affright.
As in the fable of the lady fair,
Which for her lust was turned into a cow:
When thirsty to a stream she did repair,
And saw herself transformed, she wist not how,
At first she startles, then she stands amazed,
At last with terror she from thence doth fly,
And loathes the wat'ry glass wherein she gazed,
And shuns it still, though she for thirst do die.
Even so man's soul, which did God's image bear,
And was at first fair, good, and spotless pure,
Since with her sins her beauties blotted were,
Doth of all sights her own sight least endure.
For even at first reflection she espies
Such strange chimeras and such monsters there,
Such toys, such antics, and such vanities,
As she retires and shrinks for shame and fear.
And as the man loves least at home to be,
So she, impatient her own faults to see,
Turns from herself and in strange things delights.
For this, few know themselves; for merchants broke
View their estate with discontent and pain,
And seas are troubled when they do revoke
Their flowing waves into themselves again.
And while the face of outward things we find
Pleasing and fair, agreeable and sweet,
These things transport and carry out the mind,
That with herself herself can never meet.
Yet if affliction once her wars begin,
And threat the feebler sense with sword and fire,
The mind contracts herself and shrinketh in,
And to herself she gladly doth retire,
As spiders touched seek their webs' inmost part,
As bees in storms unto their hives return,
As blood in danger gathers to the heart,
As men seek towns when foes the country burn.
If aught can teach us aught, affliction's looks,
Making us look into ourselves so near,
Teach us to know ourselves beyond all books,
Or all the learned schools that ever were.
This mistress lately plucked me by the ear,
And many a golden lesson hath me taught;
Hath made my senses quick and reason clear,
Reformed my will and rectified my thought.
So do the winds and thunders cleanse the air;
So working lees settle and purge the wine;
So doth the fire the drossy gold refine.
Neither Minerva nor the learned muse,
Nor rules of art, nor precepts of the wise,
Could in my brain those beams of skill infuse,
As but the glance of this dame's angry eyes.
She within lists my ranging mind hath brought,
That now beyond myself I list not go;
Myself am center of my circling thought,
Only myself I study, learn, and know.
I know my body's of so frail a kind
As force without, fevers within, can kill;
I know the heavenly nature of my nind,
But 'tis corrupted both in wit and will;
I know my soul hath power to know all things,
Yet is she blind and ignorant of all;
I know I am one of nature's little kings,
Yet to the least and vilest things am thrall.
I know my life's a pain and but a span,
I know my sense is mocked with everything;
And to conclude, I know myself a man,
Which is a proud and yet a wretched thing.

And yet we should consider how we go forward.
To feel is not enough, nor to think, nor to move
nor to put your body in danger in front of an old loophole
when scalding oil and molten lead furrow the walls.

And yet we should consider towards what we go forward,
not as our pain would have it, and our hungry children
and the chasm between us and the companions calling from the opposite shore;
nor as the bluish light whispers it in an improvised hospital,
the pharmaceutic glimmer on the pillow of the youth operated on at noon;
but it should be in some other way, I would say like
the long river that emerges from the great lakes enclosed deep in Africa,
that was once a god and then became a road and a benefactor, a judge and a delta;
that is never the same, as the ancient wise men taught,
and yet always remains the same body, the same bed, and the same Sign,
the same orientation.

I want nothing more than to speak simply, to be granted that grace.

If pain is human we are not human beings merely to suffer pain;
this meaning that moves forward among herbs and greenery
and beasts that graze and drink, men who sow and harvest,
great tombs even and small habitations of the dead.
This current that goes its way and that is not so different from the blood of men,
from the eyes of men when they look straight ahead without fear in their hearts,
without the daily tremor for trivialities or even for important things;
when they look straight ahead like the traveller who is used to gauging his way by the stars,
not like us, the other day, gazing at the enclosed garden of a sleepy Arab house,
behind the lattices the cool garden changing shape, growing larger and smaller,
we too changing, as we gazed, the shape of our desire and our hearts,
caught in the embroidered nets of a life that was as it should be and then became dust and sank into the sands
leaving behind it only that vague dizzying sway of a tall palm tree.

Speak in English or the guard is going to come
Speak in English or the guard is gonna get us hermana
Speak in English come on
You better figure it out hermana the guard is right there
See the bus driver
So many days and we didn't even know where we were headed
I know where we're going
Where we always go
To some detention center to some fingerprinting hall or cube
Some warehouse warehouse after warehouse
Pero ya nos investigaron ya cruzamos ya nos cacharon
But they already questioned us we already crossed over they
already grabbed us the Border Patrol what more do they want
We are on the bus now
that is all
Where are we going I am telling you I came from Honduras
That you came from nowhere
I came from nowhere
And we crossed the border from nowhere
And now you and me and everybody else here is
On a bus to nowehere you got it?
Pero por eso nos venimos para salir de la nada
When the bus stops there will be more nothing
No quieren que sigamos
Those people there who are they
they don't want the bus to keep going
they don't want us to keep going
now they are blocking the bus
so where do we go
What?
nosotros como gallinas como topos en jaulas y verduras
de los techos y los desiertos de Arizona de Tajas sed y hambre
It took me 47 days to get here it wasn't easy hermana
you know what they did to las chicas
right there in front of us so what were we supposed
to do and the trains the trains how can I tell you hermana hundreds
of us like chickens like gophers in cages and vegetables
rotting on trains of thousands you hear me of thousands and they slid
from the rooftops and the deserts of Arizona and Texas thirst and hunger
thirst and hunger two things thirst and hunger day after day hermana
and now here on this bus of who-knows-where we are going
hermana listen I come from Brownsville where they tied us up
and now in California but still we're not inside and still the border
lies ahead of us

I told you to speak in English even un poquito
the guard is going to think we are doing something
people are screaming outside
they want to push the bus back
por eso me vine
le quebraron las piernas a mi padre
las pandillas mataron a mi hijo
solo quiero que estemos juntos
separados
But where do we go hermana
that's why I came here
they broke my father's legs
gangs killed my son
I just want us to be together
so many years hermana
pulled apart
What?
es la libertad la bondad y la buenas acciones
My mother told me that the most important thing
is freedom kindness and doing good
for others
What are you talking about?
I told you to be quiet
La libertad viene desde muy adentro
seremos libres y en ese momento tenemos que
llenarnos de todo el dolor de todos los seres
para liberarlos a ellos mismos
Freedom comes from deep inside
all the pain of the world lives there
the second we cleanse that pain from our guts
we shall be free and in that moment we have to
fill ourselves up with all the pain of all beings

a blanket toilets water and each other
for a while
No somos nada y venimos de la nada
pero esa nada lo es todo si la nutres de amor
por eso venceremos
We are nothing and we come from nothing
but that nothing is everything, if you feed it with love
that is why we will triumph
We are everything hermana
Because we come from everything

or borage or pomegranate embowered
none of that repose their soldier-love required to root

without mark to show what he knew
how fear cramped each man solitary
the grass that kneels to its burning

But what is not threat in this contagion and panic

and carried on doing it 
abrupt as that held in the breath
exhausted just before the witch confesses

to bend and lengthen the neck for his ax
before it loosely as leaves in a stream
He linked arms with another
dragging through darkness thick with sand and water and noise
Pressed all night to the porch of the storm his ear 

That the fury never ended he would learn
walking the eye of its silence

was the anchored ship
for such mirth
it would return to that green oak it once had been

In what hour of what night did he know his soul
to turn a stranger to him

than a hide rigid with gore & soil to be 

Daily he marched his men into corrugations of
of gold & corn made by guides snatched from villages 
restored for ransoms of melons or fish

Often some chief would repeat his good friend
& legible to their sense as the amber & musk that steamed
from these his fine furs

His dwindling force
like mayflies in their brevity & towarding and never
Each inquisitor humiliated
the silence

he amassed his ocherous archive of blister
atlas of faith in blood & smoke redrawn

Still even the most exacting map dreams
omits & lies brindled

Every step makes him more wilderness
He goes interiorly
sinew & flint between ragged bands
that command them to bury their sons alive
Girls whose marriages would multiply their foes 
of dog-headed warriors
bucked by pain onto the dirt when wives gave birth
again in no essential changed

Had any man traveled farther than he

From desert skies could be harvested evanescing 
when for two months the natives drank bad water
and ate only oysters
deer dung but also many days without
To suffer only this much
which deposits eggs in the walking nursery of a spider

A single brief season happy to know enough
everyone was summoned by neat cornet-shaped fruits
from parrot through orchid
The pangs can shrink but never close

intangible economy of magic
increased by use

Fright filled some with a lassitude they withered on
Blessing each joint with a cross and that something
of him might be spent on the hurt
like a kingfisher 
under the shadow of the vaulting falcon that played it 
fire

How much can I change before I am changed
without abradings of any other to recall him

Natives said he could not be 
as if where women & men had stood was

neither their stone houses
pierced by some small passive wingless insect
would concealed suckle & multiply its question
down a thousand generations
he was that

Without armor or felted wool or hide afterward
he was now discovered
to manifold injury & errand

A channel for pain and a channel for hearing

There was the method of kneeling,
a fine method, if you lived in a country
where stones were smooth.
hidden corners where knee fit rock.
Their prayers were weathered rib bones,
small calcium words uttered in sequence,
fuse them to the sky.

they walked like sheep.
Hear us! We have pain on earth!
We have so much pain there is no place to store it!
But the olives bobbed peacefully
in fragrant buckets of vinegar and thyme.
because there was also happiness.

Some prized the pilgrimage,
on foot, many times,
they would bend to kiss the earth
and return, their lean faces housing mystery.

While for certain cousins and grandmothers
lugging water from the spring
or balancing the baskets of grapes.
These were the ones present at births,
humming quietly to perspiring mothers.
forgetting how easily children soil clothes.

They told the old ones, you are wasting your time.
They prayed for Allah to mend their brains,
for the twig, the round moon,
to speak suddenly in a commanding tone.

And occasionally there would be one
who did none of this,
who beat everyone at dominoes,
and was famous for his laugh.

Maybe you need to write a poem about grace.

and everything dead is dead,
and the hero has looked into the mirror with complete contempt,
and the heroine has studied her face and its defects
remorselessly, and the pain they thought might,
as a token of their earnestness, release them from themselves
has lost its novelty and not released them,
and they have begun to think, kindly and distantly,
that self-love is the one weedy stalk
of every human blossoming, and understood,
except some almost inconceivable saint in his pool
faint music under things, a hovering like grace appears.

he tried to kill himself. His girl had left him.
the bay side, a blue, lucid afternoon.
that there was something faintly ridiculous about it.
scales like polished carbon, in beds of kelp
was crabs, or mussels, clams. Otherwise
carefully, and drove home to an empty house.

There was a pair of her lemon yellow panties
with rage and grief. He knew more or less
and go to sleep.
once only, once and a half, and tell himself
that he was going to carry it for a very long time
and that there was nothing he could do
to the forest in the summer dark, madrone bark
cracking and curling as the cold came up.

it must sometimes make a kind of singing.
First an ego, and then pain, and then the singing.

I remember that store, and the nasty redneck whose stink
 seemed a challenge to everyone in it. The scene 
is decades old, but I'm still confused that no one 
 an occasional fight back then. The prospect of pain 

meant less to me once, I guess. An aneurism 
had just killed my brother, so the pain I'm talking about 
was my body's. I breathed up another pain that day. 
I checked the man's beat pickup; why would he want them, 
those skunks knee-deep in its bed? I left the lot

 still more confused, my sweet retriever shivering 
on the seat beside me. The godawful smell still clung 
to the dog's wet coat, and my own. There'd be no more hikes 
for us that morning: rain had arrived, bone-chilling. 
If you killed a skunk, why would you keep the thing? 

To kill some time, I stopped at The Jackpot View. 
We've always called it that. Five mountaintops bled 
into mists to my east in New Hampshire. The sudden squalls 
spilled leaves on the woods-floor's pall of nondescript hue. 
Now he was dead. Now my brother was dead.

 I can't define any God, but only this morning, 
I caught a whiff of road-killed skunk and thought
 I could speak of Him or Her or It as surely 
as I could tell you the slightest thing concerning 
the man I'm remembering now, the one who shot 

or trapped or clubbed those miserable reeking creatures. 
The smallest enigmas we ever encounter remain 
as hard to explain as all the epical ones. 
I've failed for years to fathom the death of my brother; 
but it's just as hard to understand why a scene 

in an old Vermont store should linger like dead-skunk odor,
 which if you've lately been tainted comes back to scent you 
 you may have thought you'd forever gotten over, 
but which at some odd prompting come back to haunt you.

1

Processionals in the exemplary cave,
Benediction of shadows. Pomfret. London.
The voice fragrant with mannered humility,
With an equable contempt for this world,
Struck down into a meaty conduit of blood.
So these dispose themselves to receive each
Pentecostal blow from axe or seraph,
Spattering block-straw with mortal residue.
Psalteries whine through the empyrean. Fire
Flares in the pit, ghosting upon stone
Creatures of such rampant state, vacuous
Ceremony of possession, restless

2

For none but the ritual king? We meditate
A rueful mystery; we are dying
To satisfy fat Caritas, those
Wiped jaws of stone. (Suppose all reconciled
By silent music; imagine the future
Flashed back at us, like steel against sun,
Ultimate recompense.) Recall the cold
Of Towton on Palm Sunday before dawn,
Wakefield, Tewkesbury: fastidious trumpets
Shrilling into the ruck; some trampled
Acres, parched, sodden or blanched by sleet,
Flurrying, darkness over the human mire.

3

They bespoke doomsday and they meant it by
God, their curved metal rimming the low ridge.
But few appearances are like this. Once
Over-riding stillness might reveal men
In such array, livid and featureless,
With England crouched beastwise beneath it all.
After battle utters its own sound
Which is like nothing on earth, but is earth.
Blindly the questing snail, vulnerable
Mole emerge, blindly we lie down, blindly
Among carnage the most delicate souls

4

Let mind be more precious than soul; it will not
Endure. Soul grasps its price, begs its own peace,
Settles with tears and sweat, is possibly
Indestructible. That I can believe.
Though I would scorn the mere instinct of faith,
Expediency of assent, if I dared,
What I dare not is a waste history
Or void rule. Averroes, old heathen,
If only you had been right, if Intellect
Itself were absolute law, sufficient grace,
Our lives could be a myth of captivity
Which we might enter: an unpeopled region
Of ever new-fallen snow, a palace blazing
With perpetual silence as with torches.

5

As with torches we go, at wild Christmas,
When we revel in our atonement
Through thirty feasts of unction and slaughter,
So many things rest under consummate
Justice as though trumpets purified law,
Spikenard were the real essence of remorse.
The sky gathers up darkness. When we chant
Seraphs who descend to pity but ourselves.
Those righteously-accused those vengeful
Racked on articulate looms indulge us
With lingering shows of pain, a flagrant
Tenderness of the damned for their own flesh:

6

My little son, when you could command marvels
Without mercy, outstare the wearisome
A stranger well-received in your kingdom.
On those pristine fields I saw humankind
As it was named by the Father; fabulous
Beasts rearing in stillness to be blessed.
From remote storms, rumour of solitudes,
A composed mystery. And so it ends.
Some parch for what they were; others are made
Blind to all but one vision, their necessity
To be reconciled. I believe in my
Abandonment, since it is what I have.

7

It seemed I stared at them, they at me.
As the armies met, each mirrored the other;
Neither was outshone. So they flashed and vanished
And all that survived them was the stark ground
Of this pain. I made no sound, but once
I stiffened as though a remote cry
Reddish ice tinged the reeds; dislodged, a few
Feathers drifted across; carrion birds
Strutted upon the armour of the dead.

8

Not as we are but as we must appear,
Contractual ghosts of pity; not as we
Desire life but as they would have us live,
Set apart in timeless colloquy.
So it is required; so we bear witness,
Despite ourselves, to what is beyond us,
Each distant sphere of harmony forever
Poised, unanswerable. If it is without
Consequence when we vaunt and suffer, or
If it is not, all echoes are the same
In such eternity. Then tell me, love,
Dragged half-unnerved out of this worldly place,

couldn't stand to see these new young faces, these
bragging about how she didn't give a damn about the
kid and was going back to her boyfriend and be a
would our bodies be the same? could we hide among the
childless? she always reminded me of a lady at the bridge
club in her mother's shoes, playing her mother's hand.

i tried to get along, be silent, stay in my own corner.
but being drawn to the room down the hall, the t.v. room
where, at night, we sat in our cuddly cotton robes and
waiting to be sprung.

one girl, taller and older, twenty-six or twenty-seven, kept
to herself, talked with a funny accent, the pain on her face
seemed worse than ours. . .
said an unkind word to anyone, went to church every morning
with her rosary and prayed each night alone in her room.

she was seventeen, diabetic, fearful that she or the baby

i couldn't believe the fear, the knowledge she had of
the center of strength; death seemed remote, i could not
imagine it walking in our midst, death in the midst of
was lying. . .

gone into labor so the girls had two of us to cheer about.

had reassured her everything was fine.

meanwhile i worked in the laundry, folded the hospital
stepping off the elevator, going up, feeling something,
such a luminous smile, the whole world must be happy.

or out with those crazy girls, those teenagers, laughing,
on a christmas shopping spree, free (the only day they
let us out in two months), feet wet and cold from snow.

i felt pretty, body wide and still in black beatnik
young body like iron.

myself, book propped open on the floor, puffing and
counting while all the sixteen-year-old unwed children
smiled like i was crazy.

one day i got a letter from my cousin, said:

you'll never be complete again
you'll always worry where and how it is

of grief and shame!

would not hurt like all those women who screamed and
peasants in the field, shift my baby to my back, and
continue

when my water broke, when i saw that stain of pink blood
on the toilet paper and felt the first thing i could not
feel, had no control of, dripping down my leg, i heard
them singing mitch miller xmas songs and came from the
the long moment when no one knew but me. it was time.

the one who told them to be tough, to stop believing
that it was beautiful and right and good!

all night i pictured the girls up there, at first hanging
out of the windows, trying to get a glimpse of me. . .
when the pain was worst, i thought of their sleeping faces,
onto that image of innocence like one light in the darkness.

1
Nowhere is all around us, pressureless,
A vacuum waiting for a rupture in
The tegument, a puncture in the skin,
To pass inside without a password and
Implode us into Erewhon. This room
Is dangerously unguarded: in one wall
An empty elevator clangs its doors,
Imperiously, for fodder; in the hall,
Bare stretchers gape for commerce; in the air
Outside, a trembling, empty brightness falls
In hunger on those whom it would devour
Like any sparrow hawk as darkness falls
And rises silently up the steel stairs
To the eleventh and last floor, where I
Reside on sufferance of authorities
Until my visas wither, and I die.
2
Where is my friend, Rodonda Morton Schiff,
Whose hulk breasts, cygnet-like, the Totensee,
The Almirante of the Doldrums in
Her scuttling vessel with such poems as just
Escape confounding his gaunt rape with lust?
She should be singing my song at this hour.
3
It is a simple matter to be brave
Credits have faded in the final crawl,
To which the audience has turned its back
And mumbled, shuffled, struggled into coats
On its way out to face a different night;
It is far harder, in the light of day,
Surrounded by striped student nurses, to
Endure a slight procedure in which you
Are the anatomy lesson in pink paint
Splashed by some master on the tinctured air,
Complete, in gross detail, to the grimace
Denoted by a squiggle on your face
As the bone-marrow needle sinks its fang
Through atomies of drugged and dullard skin
And subcutaneum to pierce the thin,
Up sips of specimen tissue with a pain
Akin to an extraction under gas,
All gravity against all hollowness.
This episode in silent dignity
Or bloodless banter; I must sweat and grunt
And moan in corporal fear of corporal pain
Too venial to be mortal, making a fool
Of my lay figure in its textbook pose
(Fig. 1) before these starched and giggling girls
Too young to be let out of simpering school
To meet live terror face to face and lose.
4
Why must the young male nurse who preps the plain
With his conversant razor, talking snicks
Of scything into my sedated ears,
Talk also in his flat and friendly voice,
Of reassurance, learnt by classroom rote?
It is that he must make his living, too.
5
If Hell abides on earth this must be it:
This too-bright-lit-at-all-hours-of-the-day-
And-night recovery room, where nurses flit
In stroboscopic steps between the beds
All cheek by jowl that hold recoverers
Suspended in the grog of half-damped pain
And tubularities of light-blue light.
For condiment in this mulled mix, there are
Assorted groans and screams; and, lest repose
Outstrip the sufferer, there is his own
Throat-filling Gobi, mucous membrane gone
Dry as Arabia, as barren of
Hydropsy as a sunburnt cage of bone
Perched on parched rocks where game Parcheesian
(A devil figure, this) went, wended his
Bent way to harvest, for a shekel, rugs,
And pack them back by camel over sands
Of nightmare to transship to richer lands
Where millions of small rills plash into streams
Afflict the desiccate on their interminable way
Up through the layers of half-light to day.
6
The riddle of the Sphinx. Man walks on three
Legs at the last. I walk on three, one of
Which is a wheeled I.V. pole, when I rise
From bed the first time to make my aged way
Into the toilet, where, while my legs sway
And the pole sways, swinging its censer high,
I wait to urinate, and cannot make
My mortal coils distill a drop, as time
Stumps past and leaves me swaying there. Defeat:
I roll and hobble back to bed, to the
Refrain of cheeping wheels. Soon the young man
Will come to see me and supply the lack
Of my drugged muscles with the gravity
A beige bag clipped to the bedside, one of
As a condition of continuance.
The body swells until it duns the mind
With importunities in this refined,
White-sheeted torture, practiced by a kind,
Withdrawn white face trained in the arts of love.
7
Home, and the lees of autumn scuttle up
To my halt feet: fat, sportive maple leaves
Struck into ochre by the frost and stripped
From their umbilic cords to skate across
The blacktop drive and fetch up on my shoes
As if including me in their great fall,
Windy with rumors of the coming ice.
Though fallen, frostbit, yellowed also, I
Cannot participate in their late game
But must leave them to hide and seek a place
To decompose in, while I clamber up
Long enneads of stairs to the room where
A world of voices and surprises, for
From indefatigable spinnerets,
Until her sister widows, having set
The norms for length and texture of each strand
And sharpened their gross shears, come cut it off
And send me to befriend the winter leaves.

Not so far away, a scream so rending that to hear it is to be
Frozen mold and insist that they too, like mouse-eared chickweed,
And the myriad lines that criss-cross tell the story of nearly fifty
Rearing up and offices like monuments and crowds lined up to see
Quote from Aeschylus: I forget. All, all is forgotten gradually and
One wonders if these ideas that seem handed down are truly what they were?
Gull coasts by, unexpected as a kiss on the nape of the neck. These
Mysterious than that, pierced by blue or running in the rain
Bring no pleasure: arduous truths to tell. And if you thought March was bad
With depth to it. That is like pain, ordinary household pain,
Like piles, or bumping against a hernia. All the signs are set for A OK
To cardinals? I hear them call. Plaintively, in the mating season.
To see. And there are sights to hear, music from a phonograph, pop
Is how the light becomes entrapped in a dusty screen, masking out
The view into the depths of the garage where the cars are stalled like oxen.
Day, suddenly sunny and warming up for more, I would like to stroke you
As one strokes a cat and feels the ridgy skull beneath the fur and tickles
It behind its ears. The cat twists its head and moves it toward your fingers
The sun strokes all now in this zone, reaching in through windows to jell
Ungathered up. I hate fussing with nature and would like the world to be
Thrive. So much messing about, why not leave the world alone? Then
There would be no books, which is not to be borne. Willa Cather alone is worth
The greatest paintings. Preferred orchestral conductors. Nostalgia singers.
Love: the boy who opts for trade school while white collar kids
Stamp an impression on them. It is quite other. They stamp us, both
And yellow and warm as lit gas jets, clinging like bees to
And just before the snap of temper one had sensed so

The startling pleasures all broke down,
It was her first arthritic spring.
Inside her furs, her bones, secure,
Suddenly became a source of pain
And froze on a Saturday afternoon

Strength had been her weakness, and
Because it was, she got to like
The exhilaration of catastrophes
That prove our lives as stupid as we think,
But pain, more stupid than stupidity,
Is an accident of animals in which, once caught,
The distances are never again the same.

Yet there was another Jane in Jane:
She smelled the inside of a logarithm,
And felt a Gothic arch rise in her chest,
Her clavicle widening to bear the weight
Of the two smooth plumb lines of her breasts,
The blueprints forming an enormous skirt
Around her body. Arch and star and cross
Swung like little lights inside her head,
A church and temple rising from the floor,
Nave and transept and an altar where,
Unbidden, she saw a kind of sacrifice;
The knife was in her hand, the stick, the whip;
She cried at her cruelty and cried to be
Outside of her defenses. And just then,

The windows buckled in, the paintings cracked,
The furniture went walking by itself,
All out of her control. And it was pain
That let her know she was herself again:
She wore a cloak of fire on her skin,
And power, power floated up to her.

The courage to let go of the door, the handle.
The courage to shed the familiar walls whose very
stains and leaks are comfortable as the little moles
of the upper arm; stains that recall a feast,
that slapped the roof hard, pouring through.
 
The courage to abandon the graves dug into the hill,
the small bones of children and the brittle bones
of the old whose marrow hunger had stolen;
the courage to desert the tree planted and only
begun to bear; the riverside where promises were
shaped; the street where their empty pots were broken.
 
The courage to leave the place whose language you learned
as early as your own, whose customs however dan-
gerous or demeaning, bind you like a halter
you have learned to pull inside, to move your load;
the land fertile with the blood spilled on it;
the roads mapped and annotated for survival.
 
The courage to walk out of the pain that is known
into the pain that cannot be imagined,
mapless, walking into the wilderness, going
barefoot with a canteen into the desert;
stuffed in the stinking hold of a rotting ship
 
Cathay, India, Siberia, goldeneh medina2 
leaving bodies by the way like abandoned treasure.
So they walked out of Egypt.3 So they bribed their way
out of Russia under loads of straw; so they steamed
out of the bloody smoking charnelhouse of Europe
 
out of pain into death or freedom or a different
painful dignity, into squalor and politics.
We Jews are all born of wanderers, with shoes
under our pillows and a memory of blood that is ours
raining down. We honor only those Jews who changed
tonight, those who chose the desert over bondage,
 
who walked into the strange and became strangers
and gave birth to children who could look down
on them standing on their shoulders for having
been slaves. We honor those who let go of every-
thing but freedom, who ran, who revolted, who fought,
who became other by saving themselves.

* A popular preacher or an angel who conveys, in mysterious ways, teachings only to scholars worthy ofl such communications (Hebrew).
2. Golden land (Yiddish).
3. A reference to the biblical Exodus out of Egypt.

I don't want to be alive anymore.
I don't want to be alive enough to want that.

One is not meant to turn on one's creator
with ferocity expendable in only one way.

Or is that exactly how one is meant to turn
to burn
beyond the love that from beyond being
has come to us:

Christ's ever unhearable
and thus always too bearable
scream.

In love and dread we learn to listen
for beloved dread

coming upon us like a whiplash rain
we watch through a window.

In pain we learn pain.

Sometimes amid the rancid moonlight and mindlice of my insomnia
there gleams a scalpel blade

so clean with meaning
so shaped and sharpened to interstellar blue

across my own throat

there comes not blood but an ancient answering
starlight.

Once upon a time in a pleasingly modern slaughterhospice
with a view of sky-contempted skyscrapers

and Lake Michigan's immaculate sewage
my inner skin was skinned mouth to bowels,

For self-pity there must remain a self.

one still finds one's self hastening to hide it all
from the kind Ukranian nearly bearded night nurse.

Fentanyl patches patching my stalactite thighs
my diaphanous shoulders

the very air eating me
like a late leaf

that once I would have flourished
for a perishable lover

into a poem.

Dead brain, living will, little pills
entangling pain with adoration of it,

morphine machine whose little beep
(heavenly bell)

conjures me to the suddenly more tolerable hallways
of hell . . .

so unsurgically curved,
disclosing as she leans to clean my lines

a bit of icelace undergarment like the very last trace
of a glacier.

The brain the brain the brain flickering electrically
in and out,

not the mind in which I love
my wife

whose tightwound nightmind conjures Christ in diapers,
for instance, filthy infant, or later,

in a mist of adolescent bad weather,
bored of wood, dogdead Judea, squawk-box God,

some restless absurdity of earth, she says,
through which the rest of heaven can come.

Once upon a time I walked through the chemical glamour
of a night refinery

sparking dangerously without and within
for beside me under her underclothes

undulated an incarnation
of creation's finest failure:

moonskin to make a young man wince
coupled with stifling innocence.

Still, we managed.

And over the wrought-iron railing of the country club
to which neither of us could possibly belong,

in the moonskinned pool that seemed both to embody and imbibe
her, we improved.

And later, out on a green (to be sixteen!)
when the starshower I thought was mine

was mining me for sweat, muscle, memory
to make its own death

shine unceasingly inside of me,
even unto hell,

Can it be that her last name was really Key?

So much life in this poem
so much salvageable and saving love

but it is I fear I swear I tear open
what heart I have left

to keep it from being
and beating and bearing down upon me
 

What rest in faith
wrested

What truce
in bowing
down

not to the ground
of being
to the ground

Affliction flickers
distant
like a structure
on fire
reprieve
moves through me

like a breeze

But antlike
crawls all over me Lord
and I cry out
if you call
quiet
this riot
of needs and genes
an I

Feelingly
bones
of sounds
I make my scathing
way
in church
or in the parked
car
I try

What might it mean
to surrender
nothing
Not to end
1.

The dark socket of the year
the pit, the cave where the sun lies down
and threatens never to rise,
when despair descends softly as the snow
covering all paths and choking roads:

then hawkfaced pain seized you
threw you so you fell with a sharp
cry, a knife tearing a bolt of silk.
My father heard the crash but paid
no mind, napping after lunch

yet fifteen hundred miles north
I heard and dropped a dish.
Your pain sunk talons in my skull
and crouched there cawing, heavy
as a great vessel filled with water,

oil or blood, till suddenly next day
the weight lifted and I knew your mind
had guttered out like the Chanukah
candles that burn so fast, weeping
veils of wax down the chanukiya.

Those candles were laid out,
friends invited, ingredients bought
for latkes and apple pancakes,
that holiday for liberation
and the winter solstice

when tops turn like little planets.
Shall you have all or nothing
take half or pass by untouched?
Nothing you got, Nun said the dreydl
as the room stopped spinning.

The angel folded you up like laundry
your body thin as an empty dress.
Your clothes were curtains
hanging on the window of what had
been your flesh and now was glass.

Outside in Florida shopping plazas
loudspeakers blared Christmas carols
and palm trees were decked with blinking
lights. Except by the tourist
hotels, the beaches were empty.

Pelicans with pregnant pouches
flapped overhead like pterodactyls.
In my mind I felt you die.
First the pain lifted and then
you flickered and went out.

2.

I walk through the rooms of memory.
Sometimes everything is shrouded in dropcloths,
every chair ghostly and muted.

Other times memory lights up from within
bustling scenes acted just the other side
of a scrim through which surely I could reach

my fingers tearing at the flimsy curtain

In sleep the other night I met you, seventeen
your first nasty marriage just annulled,
thin from your abortion, clutching a book

against your cheek and trying to look
older, trying to look middle class,

dressing for parties in cast off
stage costumes of your sisters. Your eyes
were hazy with dreams. You did not

notice me waving as you wandered
past and I saw your slip was showing.
You stood still while I fixed your clothes,

as if I were your mother. Remember me
combing your springy black hair, ringlets
that seemed metallic, glittering;

remember me dressing you, my seventy year
old mother who was my last dollbaby,
giving you too late what your youth had wanted.

3.

What is this mask of skin we wear,
what is this dress of flesh,
this coat of few colors and little hair?

This voluptuous seething heap of desires
and fears, squeaking mice turned up
in a steaming haystack with their babies?

This coat has been handed down, an heirloom
this coat of black hair and ample flesh,
this coat of pale slightly ruddy skin.

This set of hips and thighs, these buttocks
they provided cushioning for my grandmother
Hannah, for my mother Bert and for me

and we all sat on them in turn, those major
muscles on which we walk and walk and walk
over the earth in search of peace and plenty.

My mother is my mirror and I am hers.
What do we see? Our face grown young again,
our breasts grown firm, legs lean and elegant.

Our arms quivering with fat, eyes
set in the bark of wrinkles, hands puffy,
our belly seamed with childbearing,

Give me your dress that I might try it on.
Oh it will not fit you mother, you are too fat.
I will not fit you mother.

I will not be the bride you can dress,
the obedient dutiful daughter you would chew,

You strike me sometimes just to hear the sound.
Loneliness turns your fingers into hooks
barbed and drawing blood with their caress.

My twin, my sister, my lost love,
I carry you in me like an embryo
as once you carried me.

4.

What is it we turn from, what is it we fear?
Did I truly think you could put me back inside?
Did I think I would fall into you as into a molten
furnace and be recast, that I would become you?

What did you fear in me, the child who wore
your hair, the woman who let that black hair
grow long as a banner of darkness, when you
a proper flapper wore yours cropped?

You pushed and you pulled on my rubbery
flesh, you kneaded me like a ball of dough.
Rise, rise, and then you pounded me flat.
Secretly the bones formed in the bread.

I became willful, private as a cat.
You never knew what alleys I had wandered.
You called me bad and I posed like a gutter
queen in a dress sewn of knives.

All I feared was being stuck in a box
with a lid. A good woman appeared to me
indistinguishable from a dead one
except that she worked all the time.

Your payday never came. Your dreams ran
with bright colors like Mexican cottons
that bled onto the drab sheets of the day
and would not bleach with scrubbing.

My dear, what you said was one thing
but what you sang was another, sweetly
subversive and dark as blackberries
and I became the daughter of your dream.

This body is your body, ashes now
and roses, but alive in my eyes, my breasts,
my throat, my thighs. You run in me
a tang of salt in the creek waters of my blood,

you sing in my mind like wine. What you
did not dare in your life you dare in mine.
1. deathbed

There is a word that is not water,
has nothing to do with heat or light,
is unrelated to any one pain
though the torn body tears itself further
trying to speak it.
beyond all the sounds that I have made,
the needs that one by one I've tried to name.
It burns clear in the eyes searching mine,
the lips beginning to bleed again,
her hand squeezing my hand,
pleading and pleading that I understand.

2. living will

All afternoon in the afterlife
of little things that love,
or pain, or need could not let go of
I hunt for the will
that will let me let you go.

all the grainy faces
in old photographs, letters
from the dead, deeds to places
that are only air,

some bright nowhere
of broad fields and sunlight
that was my idea of heaven
one long afternoon
of clouds and steady rain

when you sat and explained
where a garden was, a well,
excited by it, the hell
ahead of you
just a brief tightness at your heart.

Outside in the yard, crickets start,
cry here and here and here, 
night's thousand shadows growing tall.
And now I have it, formal, final.
I touch each keepsake like a wall.

3. going

In the hard light and hum
of the room to which I've come
to stay, I watch the clock,
and wait, and hour by hour
begin to disappear.
Movements, mutterings: the brain
darkens like a landscape. Pain
in the pale arterial hills
flashes and vanishes,
takes with it one whole year.
Cotton and killdeer, a cloud
looks down, something's happened
in the wellhouse, someone runs
through tall trees, breathe and breathe,
is it my hand you hold?
The fever climbs. You grow cold,
then warm, now cold again,
a hive of nerves in the skin.
Some glimmer breaks through
and I bend whispering as fear
like a wind shakes you,
I'm right here, I'm right here...

Midnight, moonlight gauzing
the walls, the iron and umber
of intensive care:
I watch as it swells and falls
the puttied scar at your heart,
and read each beat and falter
on a screen and match my breathing
to the breathing of a machine
to know this time as it passes,
until, early, you shudder
and quieten, blood gases
begin to rapidly rise
and somewhere behind your eyes
I fall in fragments away:
a child surprised at his play,
encroached upon by air,
a shattered man near dawn,
something about the way
he holds so still, his hair.

There was a roaring in the wind all night; 
The rain came heavily and fell in floods; 
But now the sun is rising calm and bright; 
The birds are singing in the distant woods; 
Over his own sweet voice the Stock-dove broods; 
The Jay makes answer as the Magpie chatters; 
And all the air is filled with pleasant noise of waters. 

All things that love the sun are out of doors; 
The sky rejoices in the morning's birth; 
The hare is running races in her mirth; 
And with her feet she from the plashy earth 
Raises a mist, that, glittering in the sun, 
Runs with her all the way, wherever she doth run. 

I was a Traveller then upon the moor; 
I saw the hare that raced about with joy; 
I heard the woods and distant waters roar; 
Or heard them not, as happy as a boy: 
The pleasant season did my heart employ: 
My old remembrances went from me wholly; 
And all the ways of men, so vain and melancholy. 

But, as it sometimes chanceth, from the might 
Of joys in minds that can no further go, 
As high as we have mounted in delight 
In our dejection do we sink as low; 
To me that morning did it happen so; 
And fears and fancies thick upon me came; 

I heard the sky-lark warbling in the sky; 
And I bethought me of the playful hare: 
Even such a happy Child of earth am I; 
Even as these blissful creatures do I fare; 
Far from the world I walk, and from all care; 
Solitude, pain of heart, distress, and poverty. 

My whole life I have lived in pleasant thought, 
As if life's business were a summer mood; 
As if all needful things would come unsought 
To genial faith, still rich in genial good; 
But how can He expect that others should 
Build for him, sow for him, and at his call 
Love him, who for himself will take no heed at all? 

I thought of Chatterton, the marvellous Boy, 
The sleepless Soul that perished in his pride; 
Of Him who walked in glory and in joy 
Following his plough, along the mountain-side: 
By our own spirits are we deified: 
We Poets in our youth begin in gladness; 
But thereof come in the end despondency and madness. 

Now, whether it were by peculiar grace, 
A leading from above, a something given, 
Yet it befell that, in this lonely place, 
When I with these untoward thoughts had striven, 
Beside a pool bare to the eye of heaven 
I saw a Man before me unawares: 
The oldest man he seemed that ever wore grey hairs. 

As a huge stone is sometimes seen to lie 
Couched on the bald top of an eminence; 
Wonder to all who do the same espy, 
By what means it could thither come, and whence; 
So that it seems a thing endued with sense: 
Like a sea-beast crawled forth, that on a shelf 
Of rock or sand reposeth, there to sun itself; 

Such seemed this Man, not all alive nor dead, 
His body was bent double, feet and head 
Coming together in life's pilgrimage; 
As if some dire constraint of pain, or rage 
Of sickness felt by him in times long past, 
A more than human weight upon his frame had cast. 

Himself he propped, limbs, body, and pale face, 
Upon a long grey staff of shaven wood: 
And, still as I drew near with gentle pace, 
Upon the margin of that moorish flood 
Motionless as a cloud the old Man stood, 
That heareth not the loud winds when they call, 
And moveth all together, if it move at all. 

At length, himself unsettling, he the pond 
Stirred with his staff, and fixedly did look 
Upon the muddy water, which he conned, 
As if he had been reading in a book: 
And now a stranger's privilege I took; 
And, drawing to his side, to him did say, 
"This morning gives us promise of a glorious day." 

A gentle answer did the old Man make, 
In courteous speech which forth he slowly drew: 
And him with further words I thus bespake, 
"What occupation do you there pursue? 
This is a lonesome place for one like you." 
Ere he replied, a flash of mild surprise 
Broke from the sable orbs of his yet-vivid eyes. 

His words came feebly, from a feeble chest, 
But each in solemn order followed each, 
Choice word and measured phrase, above the reach 
Of ordinary men; a stately speech; 
Such as grave Livers do in Scotland use, 
Religious men, who give to God and man their dues. 

He told, that to these waters he had come 
To gather leeches, being old and poor: 
Employment hazardous and wearisome! 
And he had many hardships to endure: 
From pond to pond he roamed, from moor to moor; 
Housing, with God's good help, by choice or chance; 
And in this way he gained an honest maintenance. 

The old Man still stood talking by my side; 
But now his voice to me was like a stream 
Scarce heard; nor word from word could I divide; 
And the whole body of the Man did seem 
Like one whom I had met with in a dream; 
Or like a man from some far region sent, 
To give me human strength, by apt admonishment. 

My former thoughts returned: the fear that kills; 
And hope that is unwilling to be fed; 
Cold, pain, and labour, and all fleshly ills; 
And mighty Poets in their misery dead. 
My question eagerly did I renew, 
"How is it that you live, and what is it you do?" 

He with a smile did then his words repeat; 
And said that, gathering leeches, far and wide 
He travelled; stirring thus about his feet 
The waters of the pools where they abide. 
"Once I could meet with them on every side; 
But they have dwindled long by slow decay; 
Yet still I persevere, and find them where I may." 

While he was talking thus, the lonely place, 
In my mind's eye I seemed to see him pace 
About the weary moors continually, 
Wandering about alone and silently. 
While I these thoughts within myself pursued, 
He, having made a pause, the same discourse renewed. 

And soon with this he other matter blended, 
Cheerfully uttered, with demeanour kind, 
But stately in the main; and, when he ended, 
I could have laughed myself to scorn to find 
In that decrepit Man so firm a mind. 
"God," said I, "be my help and stay secure; 
I'll think of the Leech-gatherer on the lonely moor!" 

All day they stream past, petitioners
for understanding, accolade, critique.
I read them all, a vast anthology
of jumbled genres on a common theme:
affliction. So I parse, interpret, scan.
I graph dysrhythmias, dysmetrias;
I eavesdrop on caesuras for unsaid
murmurs, gallops, rubs, snaps, flutters, clicks.
the elephant that squats upon a chest
is not a burning heart or waterbrash.

Just take the imagists. Their heads explode.
St Elmo's fire flashdances on their limbs.
They float, they swim. Knives twist within their flesh.
They're ball-and-chained by lead, filled with concrete.
Butterflies inhabit them. Their pipes
are wrong, and clogged. Their systems freeze and crash.
Invaded, they resist; defenses fail.
What they need, they think, is you to flush
it out of them, whatever it is, doc.

The formalists present minutiae,
from acne, backpain, catarrh, dandruff, eye-
strain, flatfoot, gas pains, hangnail, itchiness,
the jitters, kinks, lethargies, migraines, nose-
bleeds, obstipation, panics, queasy retch-
ings, styes and tremors, ulcers, vertigo,
to wandering womb, xerosis, yaws and zits.

Free versers, on the other hand, wax Walt
Whitmanic: their barbaric yawps celebrate and sing
incantatory songs of themselves, songs
of the breath as it wheezes and rales through them,
the short breath and long breath, the breath that is moist or dry,
songs of the blood, the thick- and thinness of it, its heat, its turbulence,
songs of the gut, its rippling coils, the dark burden of its secret indulgences,
songs of the muscled limb, inflamed with toil or the languid thrash of love.

Didacticists, of course, will always add
their theories of omission or commission:
slept in a draft, got their feet wet, caught a chill,
forgot their overshoes and oversoul,
ate too little roughage, too much ham,
should have pumped less iron or pumped more,
Mea culpa, meus morbus they intone,
certain you'll absolve them back to health.

Narrativists enshrine a fleeting pain
within an epic of chronology
brushed my teeth, ate oatmeal with a pat
of low-fat margarine, the kind that has
the dancing turkey on the tub, on sale
for .99 at Johnnie's, by the time
you tune back in it's afternoon, the pain
has come and gone; they're vacuuming the rug,
the doorbell rings, the kettle's whistling,
through supper, TV, bedtime, dreams, alarm
clock going off at six. Try Tylenol,
you say, your fingers crossed. Call if it's worse.

Then there's the avant garde. The cutting edge.
The text Munchausens off the sizzling page.
Hypoglossalalia muscles in,
between John Cagey silences, the din
and Sturm of wild unsound, unsense.
O, there are stranger dysphasias, Wernicke,
than are dreamt of in your neurologies,
mutant L=A=N=G=U=A=G=Es that cacophone
far off the beaten geographic tongue,
where elephants explode and overshoes
it's yours. And that's, of course, the joke. You nod.
You say, "I understand." You really don't.

And the music's not immortal; but the world has made it sweet
And it pulses through the pleasures of the City and the pain

To remember and to recompense the music evermore

Go down to Kew in lilac-time, in lilac-time, in lilac-time;

The cherry-trees are seas of bloom and soft perfume and sweet perfume,

The linnet and the throstle, too, and after dark the long halloo

And when the rose begins to pout and all the chestnut spires are out

Come down to Kew in lilac-time, in lilac-time, in lilac-time;

And in all the gaudy busses there are scores of weary feet
Making time, sweet time, with a dull mechanic beat,

Verdi, Verdi, when you wrote Il Trovatore did you dream
Of the organ and the monkey and the many-coloured stream
On the Picadilly pavement, of the myriad eyes that seem
To be litten for a moment with a wild Italian gleam
As A che la morte parodies the world's eternal theme

There's a thief, perhaps, that listens with a face of frozen stone
There's a portly man of business with a balance of his own,
There's a clerk and there's a butcher of a soft reposeful tone.
And they're all of them returning to the heavens they have known:

There's a very modish woman and her smile is very bland
And her hansom jingles onward, but her little jewelled hand
Is clenched a little tighter and she cannot understand
What she wants or why she wanders to that undiscovered land,
For the parties there are not at all the sort of thing she planned,

There's a rowing man that listens, and his heart is crying out
For the barge, the eight, the Isis, and the coach's whoop and shout,
For the minute-gun, the counting and the long dishevelled rout,
For the howl along the tow-path and a fate that's still in doubt,
For a roughened oar to handle and a race to think about

There's a labourer that listens to the voices of the dead
And his hand begins to tremble and his face to smoulder red,
And stares into the sunset where his April love is fled,
For he hears her softly singing, and his lonely soul is led

There's an old and haggard demi-rep, it's ringing in her ears,
With the wild and empty sorrow of the love that blights and sears,
Oh, and if she hurries onward, then be sure, be sure she hears,
Hears and bears the bitter burden of the unforgotten years,
And her laugh's a little harsher and her eyes are brimmed with tears

There's a barrel-organ carolling across a golden street
Though the music's only Verdi there's a world to make it sweet
Just as yonder yellow sunset where the earth and heaven meet
Mellows all the sooty City! Hark, a hundred thousand feet
Are marching on to glory through the poppies and the wheat

And enriched it with the harmonies that make a song complete
In the deeper heavens of music where the night and morning meet,
And it pulses through the pleasures of the City and the pain

Come down to Kew in lilac-time, in lilac-time, in lilac time;
And you shall wander hand and hand with love in summer's wonderland;

[Introduction] 
Lo now! four other acts upon the stage, 
Childhood, and Youth, the Manly, and Old-age. 
The first: son unto Phlegm, grand-child to water, 
The second: frolic claims his pedigree; 
From blood and air, for hot and moist is he. 
The last, of earth and heavy melancholy, 
Solid, hating all lightness, and all folly. 
His spring was intermixed with some snow. 
Upon his head a Garland Nature set: 
Of Daisy, Primrose, and the Violet. 
Such cold mean flowers (as these) blossom betime, 
His hobby striding, did not ride, but run, 
And in his hand an hour-glass new begun, 
In dangers every moment of a fall, 
But if he held till it have run its last, 
Then may he live till threescore years or past. 
Next, youth came up in gorgeous attire 
(As that fond age, doth most of all desire), 
His Suit of Crimson, and his Scarf of Green. 
Garland of Roses, Pinks, and Gillyflowers 
His face as fresh, as is Aurora fair, 
He seems to fly, or swim, and not to ride. 
Then prancing on the Stage, about he wheels; 
But as he went, death waited at his heels. 
The next came up, in a more graver sort, 
As one that cared for a good report. 
Of Autumn fruits a basket on his arm, 
And last of all, to act upon this Stage, 
Leaning upon his staff, comes up old age. 
Under his arm a Sheaf of wheat he bore, 
A Harvest of the best: what needs he more? 
This writ about: This out, then I am done. 
His hoary hairs and grave aspect made way, 
And all gave ear to what he had to say. 
These being met, each in his equipage 
Intend to speak, according to their age, 
But wise Old-age did with all gravity 
To childish childhood give precedency, 
And to the rest, his reason mildly told: 
That he was young, before he grew so old. 
To do as he, the rest full soon assents, 
Their method was that of the Elements, 
That each should tell what of himself he knew, 
With heed now stood, three ages of frail man, 
To hear the child, who crying, thus began. 

Childhood 
A nothing, here to day, but gone to morrow, 
But night and darkness must with shame conceal. 
To shew her bearing pangs, I should do wrong, 
With tears into this world I did arrive; 
My mother still did waste, as I did thrive, 
Who yet with love and all alacity, 
Spending was willing to be spent for me. 
With wayward cries, I did disturb her rest, 
Who sought still to appease me with her breast; 
When wretched I (ungrate) had done the wrong. 
When Infancy was past, my Childishness 
Did act all folly that it could express. 
My silliness did only take delight, 
In that which riper age did scorn and slight, 
In Rattles, Bables, and such toyish stuff. 
My then ambitious thoughts were low enough. 
That its own worth it did not know nor mind. 
This little house of flesh did spacious count, 
Through ignorance, all troubles did surmount, 
Yet this advantage had mine ignorance, 
Freedom from Envy and from Arrogance. 
How to be rich, or great, I did not cark, 
Nor studious was, Kings favours how to buy, 
With costly presents, or base flattery; 
No office coveted, wherein I might 
Make strong my self and turn aside weak right. 
No malice bare to this or that great Peer, 
Nor unto buzzing whisperers gave ear. 
I gave no hand, nor vote, for death, of life. 
My quarrels, not for Diadems, did rise, 
But for an Apple, Plumb, or some such prize. 
My strokes did cause no death, nor wounds, nor scars. 
My little wrath did cease soon as my wars. 
My duel was no challenge, nor did seek. 
My foe should weltering, with his bowels reek. 
I had no Suits at law, neighbours to vex, 
Nor evidence for land did me perplex. 
I had no ships at Sea, no fraughts to loose. 
Nor yet on future things did place my hope. 
This was mine innocence, but oh the seeds 
Lay raked up of all the cursed weeds, 
Which sprouted forth in my insuing age, 
As he can tell, that next comes on the stage. 
But yet me let me relate, before I go, 
The sins and dangers I am subject to: 
A lying tongue as soon as it could speak 
And fifth Commandment do daily break; 
Oft stubborn, peevish, sullen, pout, and cry; 
Then nought can please, and yet I know not why. 
As many was my sins, so dangers too, 
For sin brings sorrow, sickness, death, and woe, 
And though I miss the tossings of the mind, 
Yet griefs in my frail flesh I still do find. 
What gripes of wind, mine infancy did pain? 
What tortures I, in breeding teeth sustain? 
What crudities my cold stomach hath bred? 
Whence vomits, worms, and flux have issued? 
What breaches, knocks, and falls I daily have? 
And some perhaps, I carry to my grave. 
Sometimes in fire, sometimes in water fall: 

Youth 
My goodly clothing and beauteous skin 
Declare some greater riches are within, 
And then the worst, in a more ugly hue, 
For thus to do we on this Stage assemble, 
Then let not him, which hath most craft dissemble. 
As might my self, and others, profit much: 
Of Science, Arts, and Tongues, I know the rules; 
The manners of the Court, I likewise know, 
Nor ignorant what they in Country do. 
The brave attempts of valiant Knights I prize 
The snorting Horse, the Trumpet, Drum I like, 
I cannot lie in trench before a Town, 
Nor wait til good advice our hopes do crown. 
I scorn the heavy Corslet, Musket-proof; 
Though thus in field, at home, to all most kind, 
So affable that I do suit each mind, 
I can insinuate into the breast 
And by my mirth can raise the heart deprest. 
Sweet Music rapteth my harmonious Soul, 
And elevates my thoughts above the Pole. 
My wit, my bounty, and my courtesy 
Makes all to place their future hopes on me. 
This is my best, but youth (is known) alas, 
To be as wild as is the snuffing Ass, 
As vain as froth, as vanity can be, 
That who would see vain man may look on me: 
My wit evaporates in merriment; 
But doing so, might seem magnanimous. 
I know no Law, nor reason, but my will; 
Sometimes lay wait to take a wealthy purse 
Sometimes I cheat (unkind) a female Heir 
Of all at once, who not so wise, as fair, 
Trusteth my loving looks and glozing tongue 
Until mine own be gone, my wit, and wealth. 
From pipe to pot, from pot to words and blows, 
For he that loveth Wine wanteth no woes. 
Days, nights, with Ruffins, Roarers, Fiddlers spend, 
To all obscenity my ears I bend, 
All counsel hate which tends to make me wise, 
And dearest friends count for mine enemies. 
I

The ground dove stuttered for a few steps then flew
up from his path to settle in the sun-browned
branches that were now barely twigs; in drought it coos
with its relentless valve, a tiring sound,
not like the sweet exchanges of turtles in the Song
of Solomon, or the flutes of Venus in frescoes
though all the mounds in the dove-calling drought
the hills and gulches all briary and ochre
and the small dervishes that swivelled in the dust
were like an umber study for a fresco
of The Prodigal Son, this scorched, barren acre.
He had the smell of cities in his clothes,
the steam and soot of trains of Fascist stations
and their resounding vaults, he had the memory of rain
carried in his head, the rain on Pescara's beach
with the pastel hotels, and instead of the doves
the air-show with the jets soaring and swooping
over the Fair, the smell off that beach
came back on the rock-road where the turtle lifted
its mating music into the dry acacias,
and mixed with the smell off the galloping sea-flock,
each odour distinct, of sheep trampling their pens
as if their fear had caught the wolf-scent.

The rock-brown dove had fluttered from that fear
would panic and forget him from the change
of character that the grunting swine could smell.
A sow and her litter. Acknowledged prodigal.

Grey sunrise through a sky of frosted glass,
the great trees sodden, the paths below them pooled,
the headlands veiled and muslin-thin, no birds,
and pale green combers cresting through the drizzle;
a change of climate, the clouding of the self
in a sudden culture but one more confident
in its glazed equestrian statues in wet parks,
its railway stations echoing like the combers
in the ground-shaken caves under the cliff;
gathering, cresting then dissolving shallows
as light steps quietly into the house.
Light that inaudibly fits in the house
as a book on a bookshelf with its spines of tombs
and names, mouths slightly parted, eager to speak
wherever their station now. Every library
is a cemetery in sunlight. Sometimes, a shaft . . .

Across the dry hillock, leaves chasing dead leaves
in resurrecting gusts, or in the ochre quiet
leaves too many to rake on the road's margins,
too loaded to lift themselves, they lapsed singly
or in a yellow chute from the cedar, burnt branches;
lyres of desiccation choked the dry gutters
by the caked track to Saltibus, over D'ennery.
Drought. Song of the wireless harp of the frangipani
that still makes a tangled music out of silence.

II

Now to cherish the depredations of April
the gommier maudit unshouldering its leaves,
barrow after loaded barrow, the leaves fading, yellow,
burnt grass and the tigerish shadows on the hillside,
and the azure a trowelled blue, and blue hill-smoke,
parched shortcuts and rust, cattle anchored in shadows
and groaning like winches, the didactic drought
against the hot sea that teaches what? Thirst
for the grace that springs in grooves of oblivious dust.

A fine haze screens the headland, the drizzle drifts.
Is every noun: breakwater, headland, haze,
seen through a gauze of English, a bright scrim,
a mesh in which light now defines the wires
and not its natural language? Were your life and work
simply a good translation? Would headland,
haze and the spray-wracked breakwater
pronounce their own names differently?
And have I looked at life, in other words,
through some inoperable cataract?
"What language do you speak in your own country?"
Every noun has its echo, a noun is a noise,
as every stone in the expanding sunlight
finds an exact translation in its shadow,
and it may be that you were halved by language
of Greenwich or by Pope Alexander's line,
but what makes this, if this is all it is,
more than just bearable, in fact, exultation
is the stone that is looked at, and the manchineels,
bitter, poisonous yellow berries, treacherous apples
that look like Eden's on the tree of knowledge
when the first noun was picked and named and eaten
and the shadow of knowledge defined every edge
originating language and then difference,
and subtlety, the snake and contradiction
and the sudden Babel of the manchineel.

III

The blank page grows a visionary wood.
A parallel section, no, in fact a whole province
of far, of foreign, of self-translating leaves
stands on the place where it has always stood
the right-hand margin of the page
loud, soft but voluble in their original language,
going far back in time and deep in roots
and echoing in the tunnel of the right ear
with echoes: oak-echo, beech-echo, linden-echo,
and beech and birds a half-ancestral forest
whose metre was an ocean's and whose break,
parting declared the white-lined conjugation
of combers' centuries. This ocean, English and this forest weald,
this clattering natterer "burn," this distance, mist,
kept its high columns marching as my pen moves
towards that gap of light that comes upon
the bright salt arc of a bare unprinted beach
or where the piper leaves a print, its claws,
that is the landscape, that, the stand of forest
made up of all these leaves and lines that
still rasp with delight with rhyme and incantation
pages of shade turning into translation.
And my left hand another vegetation
but not their opposite or their enemy,
palms and wild fern and praising them, the sea,
sea-almond, grape and vine and agave
that the wind's finger folded carefully
drawing its thumb to mark the dog-eared wave
across the dry hill, leaves chasing leaves
in a shiny, scurrying wind, and, in the brown quiet,
leaves, unraked, tiling the road's margins,
so loaded they don't lift, they lapse singly, yellow,
or chute from the cedars. Lyres of desiccation
in March's autumn, filling the dry gutters,
except for the wireless harp of the frangipani
that still makes its music out of extreme stillness.
In my own botanic origins, frangere panem
to break bread, flower-flour in its white lilies,
except that in rare blossom I now remember
the flower is pink. It doesn't matter.
Since whatever hue it is, its wafer it serves that need,
petal on the sky's open palate at early mass
every morning but here most on this Sunday
with its Lenten drought, the heart-coloured flowers then
the caterpillars determinedly devour,
on a Sunday when a sadness still eats at the parallel
petals of my beaten heart, and the white pews of the sea,
the waves coming in aisles, my longing
for the communion of breakfast, the leafless,
flower-less but crusted bark of the frangipani,
frangere panem, the pain that I break and eat
flower and flour, pain and pain,
bright Easter coming, like the seas white communion.

IV

In the country of the ochre afternoon
it is always still and hot, the dry leaves stirring
infrequently sometimes with the rattling pods
of what they call "women's tongues," in
the afternoon country the far hills are very quiet
and heat-hazed, but mostly in the middle
of the country of the afternoon I see the brown heat
of the skin of my first love, so still, so perfect,
so unaltered, and I see how she walked
with her sunburnt hands against the still sea-almonds,
that was when I thought we were immortal
and that love would be folded doves and folded oars
and water lapping against eroding stone
in the ochre country of the afternoon.

1 Adios, Carenage

In idle August, while the sea soft,
as I went downhill, and I nearly said:
above Laventille pink as the gown
in which the woman I left was sleeping,
exactly like me, and the man was weeping

But they had started to poison my soul
I had a sound colonial education,

watching the sea heaving up and down
signing her name with every reflection;
I knew when dark-haired evening put on
so I smile to myself as the bow rope untied
that kills them, as drowned sailors the sea.

But let me tell you how this business begin.

2 Raptures of the Deep

and the Spanish pirogues always met us halfway,
for her laces and silks, Maria Concepcion.
Ay, ay! Next thing I hear, some Commission of Inquiry
was being organized to conduct a big quiz,
I was so broke all I needed was shades and a cup
or four shades and four cups in four-cup Port of Spain;
all the silver I had was the coins on the sea.

and the Scotch pouring in through the back door.
As for that minister-monster who smuggled the booze,
that half-Syrian saurian, I got so vex to see
like a dinosaur caked with primordial ooze

whose ceiling rippled like a silk tent,
I wept under water, salt seeking salt,
cleaving me from my children, flesh of my flesh!

the hurt I had done to my wife and children,
where I could rest, like the pelicans know,
so I got raptures once, and I saw God
Where is the pillow I will not have to pay for,
and the window I can look from that frames my life?

3 Shabine Leaves the Republic

I had no nation now but the imagination.
when the power swing to their side.
a spray-plane Air Force, the Fire Brigade,
a parchment Creole, with warts
like an old sea bottle, crawling like a crab
through the holes of shadow cast by the net
of a grille balcony; cream linen, cream hat.
A spit like that worth any number of words.

I no longer believed in the revolution.
crystallize in The Twelve. Was between
I 

Sun-blazed, over Romsley, a livid rain-scarp. 

XIII 

or how, or whether it was received: 
how ditched, divested, clamped, sifted, over- 
as civic concrete, reinforceable 
base cinderblocks: 
with the Baltic and the Pontic sludge: 
music, for male and female 
voices ringingly a cappella, 
like glassblowers, inventions 
of supreme order? 

XIV 

it rests with inattention. Stupidity 
of apprehension remains at issue. 
Some qualities are best 
left unrecognized. Needless to say, 
unrecognized is not 
unacknowledged. Unnamed is not nameless. 

XVII 

the scattering, the diaspora, 
Penitence can be spoken of, it is said, 
but is itself beyond words; 
the scattering, the diaspora. 
We do not know the saints. 
His mercy is greater even than his wisdom. 
If the gospel is heard, all else follows. 
We shall rise again, clutching our wounds. 

XXXV 

to which I might speak and which 
would rightly hear me; 
negotiating sense without insult 
given or injury taken. 
elsewhere as justice, 
it is met also in the form of silence. 

XXIX 

makes him go on? We thought, hoped rather, 
he might be dead. Too bad. So how 
much more does he have of injury time? 

XL 

detestation. Take accessible to mean 
care what I say, do I? 

XLI 

For hardness of heart read costly dislike of cant. 

XLII 

XLIII 

LI 

it is for me increasingly a terrain 
conglomerate, metamorphic rock- 
are traceable across the faults. 

LII 

to my exasperated ear emits 
in a field corner where the flies 
gather and old horses shake their sides. 

LXVI 

said as much of gold. Come back, 
that practises daily 
temple-schismatics, justly 
high-handed underlings of self- 
proclaim him risen indeed. 

LXVII 

coffee and fellowship. 

LXIX 

tapping the wind. 

LXX 

for a noble vernacular: this 
with Dryden, or, perhaps, 
to the praesidium in the sacred name 
of things betrayed. Intrinsic value 
say how, precisely. Partaking of both 

You knew from my last, I think, I had again
An idea or two, and a headache. Then
Snake I promised her was an innocent one:
In expression, so beautiful in feature,
Into malignant vagabonds, or sensual
Are just traceable beside one, as if Cadmus
To end, with carpets and tapestries like a street
Phrase like these, and only once in all the years
Black gondolas lying keel-upmost, sinking
Days of study, father, or of residence:
Reputation or the good of others or
Touch by touch. I have been reading Paradise 
Failing altogether, yet with intervals
All the present glory, like the present pain,
I know that were I to stay here, it would soon
Gone now as all must go. Your loving son, 

"This is the State above the Law. 
[This is a gland at the back of the jaw, 

Some die shouting in gas or fire; 
Some die desperate, caught on the wire; 

"Regis suprema voluntas Lex" 
Some die pinned by the broken decks, 

Some die eloquent, pressed to death 
Some die wholly in half a breath. 

"There is neither Evil nor Good in life. 
[Since it is rather too late for the knife, 

Some die broken by rape or the rope; 

"I will dash to pieces who bar my way. 
[Let him write what he wishes to say. 

Bad morale through the cots around . . . 

"The war was forced on me by my foes. 
[Don't be afraid of a triple dose; 

1
She cleaned house, and then lay down long
On the long stair.

On one of those cold white wings
That the strange fowl provide for us like one hillside of the sea,
That cautery of snow that blinds us,
Pitiless light,
One winter afternoon
Fair near the place where she sank down with one wing broken,
Three friends and I were caught
Stalk still in the light.

Five of the lights. Why should they care for our eyes?
Five deer stood there.
They looked back, a good minute.
They knew us, all right:
Four chemical accidents of horror pausing
Between one suicide or another
On the passing wing
Of an angel that cared no more for our biology, our pity, and our pain
Than we care.

Why should any mere multitude of the angels care
To lay one blind white plume down
On this outermost limit of something that is probably no more
Than an aphid,
An aphid which is one of the angels whose wings toss the black pears
Of tears down on the secret shores
Of the seas in the corner
Why should five deer
Gaze back at us?
They gazed back at us.
Afraid, and yet they stood there,
More alive than we four, in their terror,
In their good time.

We had a dog.
We could have got other dogs.
Two or three dogs could have taken turns running and dragging down
Those fleet lights, whose tails must look as mysterious as the
Stars in Los Angeles.
We are men.
To kill one another.
We are a smear of obscenity
On the lake whose only peace
Is a hole where the moon
Abandoned us, that poor

If I were the moon I would shrink into a sand grain

We are men.
We are capable of anything.
We could have killed every one of those deer.
The very moon of lovers tore herself with the agony of a wounded tigress
Out of our side.
We can kill anything.
We can kill our own bodies.
Those deer on the hillside have no idea what in hell
We are except murderers.
Corroding, as it is just born, in a pile of dead
Horse dung.
I have no use for the human creature.
He subtly extracts pain awake in his own kind.
I am born one, out of an accidental hump of chemistry.
I have no use.

But
Even though we know,
As well as you know,
We could have got away with it,
Because
Who cares?

Boissevain, who was he?
Was he human? I doubt it,
From what I know
Of men.

Who was he,
Hobbling with his dry eyes
Along in the rain?

I think he must have fallen down like the plumes of new snow,
I think he must have fallen into the grass, I think he
Must surely have grown around
Her wings, gathering and being gathered,
Leaf, string, anything she could use
To build her still home of songs
Within sound of water.

By God, come to that, I would have married her too,
Think of that. Being alive with a girl
Who could turn into a laurel tree
Whenever she felt like it.
Think of that.

Outside my window just now
I can hear a small waterfall rippling antiphonally down over
The stones of my poem.

By a dismal cypress lying,
Damon cried, all pale and dying,
Kind is death that ends my pain,
But cruel she I lov'd in vain.
The mossy fountains
Murmur my trouble,
And hollow mountains
My groans redouble:
Ev'ry nymph mourns me,
Thus while I languish;
She only scorns me,
Who caus'd my anguish.
No love returning me, but all hope denying;
By a dismal cypress lying,
Like a swan, so sung he dying:
Kind is death that ends my pain,
But cruel she I lov'd in vain.

A thousand martyrs I have made, 
A thousand beauties have betrayed, 
The untamed heart to hand I brought, 
And fixed the wild and wandering thought. 

I never vowed nor sighed in vain 
The fair are pleased to give us pain, 
And though I talked of wounds and smart, 

Alone the glory and the spoil 
The triumphs, without pain or toil, 
And while I thus at random rove 
Despise the fools that whine for love.

Each grief has its unique side.
Choose the one that appeals to you.
Go gently.
Your body needs energy to repair the amputation.
Humor phantom pain.

Your brain cells are soaked with salt;
connections fail unexpectedly and often.
Ask for help.
Accept help.

Read your grief like the daily newspaper:
headlines may have information you need.
Scream. Drop-kick the garbage can across the street.

Do things a little differently
Revel in contradiction.

Talk to the person who died.
Give her a piece of your mind.

Try to touch someone at least once a day.
Approach grief with determination.
Lean into the pain.

Slowing down your body enough to feel.

Thought you were at a standstill
but you were only slowing down enough

to feel the pain. There are worse things

than running to catch the train, twisting 

Running to get to or away from?

the stranger who helps you up
wants to know, you who are so used to

anything scribbled on a prescription blank.

Just want the pain to go away, you say, 
surprised to find yourself

reaching for someone else's hand.

Long after the sun falls into the sea
and twilight slips off the horizon like a velvet sheet
and the air gets soaked in blackness;
long after clouds hover above like boulders
and stars crawl up and stud the sky;
long after bodies tangle, dance, and falter
and fatigue blows in and bends them
and sleep unloads its dreams and kneads them
and sleepers dive into the rivers inside them,
a girl unlatches a window,
walks shoeless into a forest,
her dark hair a flag rippling in darkness.

She walks into woods, her feet light-stepping
through puddles, over hard packed dirt,
through grassy hills, over sticks and pebbles
over sand soaked in day, stones sun-sizzled
over lakes and frigid streams
through dim cobbled streets
darkened squares and dusty pastures.
She runs from nothing, runs to nothing,
beyond pain, beyond graveyards and clearings.
In the dark the eyes of startled creatures
gleam like a herd of candles.
They scatter and give night its meaning.

What echo of a bell lulled her
what spirit, what scent of a word
whose storm wrote her
what banks fell to drown her
which blood star
which thread of water
which trickle of light
whose heart being launched
whose floating soul seduced her
what promise did it make her
whose memory burned her
whose prayer did she run to answer
whose help, what sorrow clot
what pain dammed inside her
what wall must she rebuild now
whose treasure beckons her
who spread ivy like a veil to blind her?
Daybreak lies chained to a blue wall
from which the stars drop
and lose all meaning.

She runs past villages that lost their names
roads that lost their destinations
seas that lost their compasses and sailors
rivers that lost their marshlands and travelers
houses that lost their sleepers and criers
trees that lost their songs and shadows
gardens that lost their violets and benches
valleys that lost their worms and farmers
mountains that lost their prophets and marauders
temples that lost their sinners and spires
lightning that lost its silver and wires
chimeras that lost their bridges
minotaurs that lost their fountains.
Crescent moons hover above her,
ancient white feathers, birdless, wingless
lost to their own meaning.

Music rises out of her vision.
It stands, a wall covered with silver mosses.
A clarinet sounds a wounded mare,
violins women who lost their children.
Flutes blow their hot dry breezes.
Pianos are mumbling sorcerers
calling spirits and powers.
Cellos chew on the sounds of thunder.
Dulcimers skip about on crutches.
Dance floors flash their knives
daring their dancers.
Words mill about the streets like orphans.
Then a lute begins groaning
and dawn loses its meaning.

Night girl, night girl
your book is full now.
You have drawn all the pictures.
You have seen many weepers.
Stars held your sky in place and moons
floated on your lakes and washed them.
When a bird sings
when dewed branches tilt sunlight into eyes
when curtains are soaked with light
when mirrors drown in shadows,
take your day to the shore, my child.
Put out the words that fired your waking,
scatter them on the sand like seeds,
then with your feet gently tap them,
and let the bright waves
receive your meaning.

secure houses. At her job in the library 
to help. In the last year of her life 
how happy they were. She listened while they 
their grotesque, fake importance. Always 

left for her on earth. But she remembered 
and slipped from pain, her hand opened 
again, and the streets opened, and she wished all well.

my story is 
how deep the heart runs 
to hide & laugh  
with your hands 
over your blank mouth 
face behind the mask  
talking in tongues  
something tearing  
feathers from a crow  
that screams 
from the furnace  
the black candle  
in a skull 
sweet pain of meat 

your story is 
a crippled animal 
dragging a steel trap 
across desert sand 
& its song of honey 
in my groin 
a factory of blue jays 
in honey locust leaves 
wet pages of smoke 
like a man 
deserting his shadow 
in dark woods 
the dog that limps away 
& rotten fruit on the trees 

this story is 
the speaking skull 
on the mantelpiece 
the wingspan of a hawk 
holding his life together  
with a black cat bone  
the six grandfathers  
& spider woman 
the dust wings 
of ghost dance vision  
stand for falling 
wunmonije witch doctor  
backwater blues 
juju man 
a silk gown on the floor  
a black bowl 
on a red lacquered table  
x-rated 

my story is 
the cup blood leaps into  
eight-to-the-bar 
a man on his knees  
facing the golden calf  
the silverfish of old lust  
mama hoodoo 
a gullah basket 
woven from your hair 
love note from the madhouse  
thornbushes 
naming the shape  
of things to come 
old murder weapons  
strings of piano wire 

our story is 
a rifle butt 
across our heads 
arpeggio of bowed grass  
among glass trees 
where they kick down doors  
& we swan-dive from  
the brooklyn bridge  
a post-hypnotic suggestion  
a mosaic membrane  
skin of words 
mirrors shattered 
in roadhouses 
in the gun-barrel night  
how a machine moves  
deeper into piles 
of bones 
the way we 
crowd at the foot 
of the gallows 

I.

Isaiah awoke angry.

Once God and Isaiah were friends.

God and Isaiah used to converse nightly, Isaiah would rush into the garden.

They conversed under the Branch, night streamed down.

Isaiah wanted a name for the pain, he called it sin.

Now Isaiah was a man who believed he was a nation.

Inside Isaiah God saw the worldsheet burning.

Isaiah and God saw things differently, I can only tell you their actions.

The nation stirred in its husk and slept again.

Like a hard glossy painting the nation slept.

Who can invent a new fear?

Yet I have invented sin, thought Isaiah, running his hand over the knobs.

God took the stay.

You, said Isaiah.

No answer.

Light bleached open the night camera.

God arrived.

Liar! said God.

Isaiah put his hands on his coat, he put his hand on his face.

Isaiah is a small man, said Isaiah, but no liar.

God paused.

Brittle on both sides, no lying.

He grinned in the dark, she went back inside.

1 
1
Thank goodness we were able to wipe the Neanderthals out, beastly things,

Thus the butcher can display under our very eyes his hands on the block,
and never refer to the rooms hidden behind where dissections are effected,

where flesh is reduced to its shivering atoms and remade for our delectation
as cubes, cylinders, barely material puddles of admixtured horror and blood.

Myrmidon, Ottoman, Olmec, Huron, and Kush: gone, gone, and goodbye.

2 
2
But back to the chamber of torture, to Rembrandt, who was telling us surely
that hoisted with such cables and hung from such hooks we too would reveal

within us intricate layerings of color and pain: alive the brush is with pain,
aglow with the cruelties of crimson, the cooled, oblivious ivory of our innards.

Fling out the hooves of your hands! Open your breast, pluck out like an Aztec
your heart howling its Cro-Magnon cries that compel to battles of riddance!

Our own planet at last, where purged of wilderness, homesickness, prowling,

who inhabits this palace, this senate, this sentried, barbed-wire enclosure
where dare enter none but subservient breeze; bent, broken blossom; dry rain.

O my dark Rosaleen, 
The priests are on the ocean green, 

Shall glad your heart, shall give you hope, 
Shall give you health, and help, and hope, 

The Erne, at its highest flood, 
For there was lightning in my blood, 

O, there was lightning in my blood, 

All day long, in unrest, 
The very soul within my breast 
The heart in my bosom faints 
My life of life, my saint of saints, 
To hear your sweet and sad complaints, 
My life, my love, my saint of saints, 
Woe and pain, pain and woe, 
To see your bright face clouded so, 
But yet will I rear your throne 

Over dews, over sands, 
Your holy delicate white hands 
At home, in your emerald bowers, 
My virgin flower, my flower of flowers, 

I could scale the blue air, 
Oh, I could kneel all night in prayer, 
And one beamy smile from you 
My toils and me, my own, my true, 
Would give me life and soul anew, 

O, the Erne shall run red, 

And gun-peal and slogan-cry 
Ere you shall fade, ere you shall die, 
The Judgement Hour must first be nigh, 
Ere you can fade, ere you can die, 

Jurassic Park meets Friday meets The Pursuit of Happyness.
There should be a scene where a little black boy is playing
with a toy dinosaur on the bus, then looks out the window
& sees the T. Rex, because there has to be a T. Rex.

with a gun, the metaphor: black boys toy with their own lives,
the foreshadow to his end, the spitting image of his father.
& this is his proof of magic or God or Santa. I want a scene

where a cop car gets pooped on by a pterodactyl, a scene
about Asian people or overused Latino stereotypes.

black girl buddy-cop film. This is not a vehicle for Will Smith
& Sofia Vergara. I want grandmas on the front porch taking out raptors

with guns they hid in walls & under mattresses. I want those little spitty,
screamy dinosaurs. I want Cicely Tyson to make a speech, maybe two.
I want Viola Davis to save the city in the last scene with a black fist afro pick

No bullets in the heroes. & no one kills the black boy. & no one kills 
the black boy. & no one kills the black boy. Besides, the only reason
I want to make this is for that first scene anyway: the little black boy
on the bus with a toy dinosaur, his eyes wide & endless

 his dreams possible, pulsing, & right there.
his dreams possible, pulsing, & right there.
For this she starred her eyes with salt
And scooped her temples thin,
Until her face shone pure of fault
From the forehead to the chin.

In coldest crucibles of pain
Her shrinking flesh was fired
And smoothed into a finer grain
To make it more desired.

Pain left her lips more clear than glass;
It colored and cooled her hand.
She lay a field of scented grass
Yielded as pasture land.

For this her loveliness was curved
And carved as silver is:
For this she was brave: but she deserved
A better grave than this.

Have any of you, passers-by,
Had an old tooth that was an unceasing discomfort?
Or a pain in the side that never quite left you?
Or a malignant growth that grew with time?
So that even in profoundest slumber
There was shadowy consciousness or the phantom of thought
Of the tooth, the side, the growth?
Even so thwarted love, or defeated ambition,
Or a blunder in life which mixed your life
Hopelessly to the end,
Will like a tooth, or a pain in the side,
Float through your dreams in the final sleep
Till perfect freedom from the earth-sphere
Comes to you as one who wakes
Healed and glad in the morning!

I drove to Oak Park, took two tours,
And looked at some of the houses.
I took the long way back along the lake.
Seems basically a part of that tradition,
With the same admixture of expansion and restraint:
The space takes off, yet leaves behind a nagging
Feeling of confinement, with the disconcerting sense
That while the superficial conflicts got resolved,
The underlying tensions brought to equilibrium,
Imagine someone reading. Contemplate a man
Oblivious to his settings, and then a distant person
Standing in an ordinary room, hemmed in by limitations,
Yet possessed by the illusion of an individual life
That blooms within its own mysterious enclosure,
In a solitary space in which the soul can breathe
But by creating it, by giving it a self-sustaining
Atmosphere of depth, both in the architecture,
And in the unconstructed life that it contains.
In a late and very brief remark, Freud speculates
Which remains almost entirely oblivious to itself;
Which can turn a house into a refuge from despair.
I wish that time could bring the future back again
And let me see things as they used to seem to me
Alone and free and filled with cares about tomorrow.
There used to be a logic in the way time passed
That made it flow directly towards an underlying space
Where all the minor, individual lives converged.
The moments borrowed their perceptions from the past
And bathed the future in a soft, familiar light
I remembered from home, and which has faded.
And the voices get supplanted by the rain,
The nights seem colder, and the angel in the mind
That used to sing to me beneath the wide suburban sky
Turns into dreamwork and dissolves into the air,
While in its place a kind of monument appears,
Magnificent in isolation, compromised by proximity
As though the years had been a pretext for reflection,
As the faces that I cherished gradually withdraw,
The reassuring settings slowly melt away,
And what remains is just a sense of getting older.
In a variation of the parable, the pure of heart
Descend into a kingdom that they never wanted
And refused to see. The homely notions of the good,
The quaint ideas of perfection swept away like
Adolescent fictions as the real forms of life
Deteriorate with manically increasing speed,
The kind man wakes into a quiet dream of shelter,
But in the paralyzing fear of being mistaken,
Of losing everything, of acquiescing in the
Obvious approach (the house shaped like a box;
As the heart shrinks down to tiny, local things.
I met you more than thirty years ago, in 1958,
All moments weigh the same, and matter equally;
Yet those that time brings back create the fables
Of a happy or unsatisfying life, of minutes
Near the beginning of October, with the World Series
Playing quietly on the radio, and the windows open,
And the California sunlight filling up the room.
When I survey the mural stretched across the years
Parts of no importance to the whole design, but which,
In their obscurity, seem more permanent and real.
I see the desks and auditorium, suffused with
Yellow light connoting earnestness and hope that
Still remains there, in a space pervaded by a
Were amorphous, with nothing to hold on to,
And the past were there forever. And the art
Eradicate the lines sketched out in childhood,
Which harden into shapes as it recedes.
I wish I knew a way of looking at the world
Structure made of years and filled with images
I wish there were a place where I could stay
Where I could wander back and forth across a field
Replete with all the incidents and small details
That gave the days their textures, that bound the
Minutes into something solid, and that linked them
All together in a way that used to seem eternal.
Cadillac, which blew up late one summer evening
Climbing up the hill outside Del Mar. And later
Baby-butcher album at your house in Mission Bay;
And three years later listening to the Velvet
Underground performing in a roller skating rink.
And yet I often think of 1968 that way, as though
That single year contained the rhythms of the rest,
As what began in hope and eagerness concluded in
Intractable confusion, as the wedding turned into a
The parts were real, and yet the dense and living
Whole they once composed seems broken now, its
Voice reduced to disembodied terms that speak to me
More distantly each day, until the tangled years
Are finally drained of feeling, and collapse into a
House in Kensington, and mine above the canyon:
Then the flat by Sears in Cambridge, where we
Moved when we got married, and the third floor
Of the house on Francis Avenue, near Harvard Square;
The big apartment in Milwaukee where we lived the
Year that John was born, and last of all the
House in Whitefish Bay, where you live now
And all those years came inexplicably undone
In mid-July. The sequence ended late last year.
Suppose we use a lifetime as a measure of the world
As it exists for one. Then half of mine has ended,
While the fragment which has recently come to be
Contains no vantage point from which to see it whole.
I think that people are the sum of their illusions,
That the cares that make them difficult to see
Are eased by distance, with their errors blending
In an intricate harmony, their truths abiding
Yet each the same as all the others) and their
Disparate careers all joined together in a tangled
Moral vision whose intense, meandering design
Seems lightened by a pure simplicity of feeling,
As in grief, or in the pathos of a life
Cut off by loneliness, indifference or hate,
Not in the sense of private satisfactions, but of
Lives that realize themselves in ordinary terms
And with the quiet inconsistencies that make them real.
The whole transcends its tensions, like the intimate
Reflections on the day that came at evening, whose
Significance was usually overlooked, or misunderstood,
Because the facts were almost always unexceptional.
Two years ago we took our son to Paris. Last night
I picked him up and took him to a Lou Reed show,
And then took him home. I look at all the houses as I
Walk down Hackett Avenue to work. I teach my classes,
Visit friends, cook introspective meals for myself,
Is the perception of the world as something good
And held in common; as a place to be perfected
In the kinds of everyday divisions and encounters
That endowed it with integrity and structure,
And that merged its private moments with the past.
What broke it into pieces? What transformed the
Flaws that gave it feeling into objects of a deep and
Or walking too far ahead of you on the rue Jacob?
I wish that life could be a window on the sun,
Instead of just this porch where I can stand and
Contemplate the wires that lace the parking lot
And feel it moving towards some unknown resolution.
The Guggenheim Museum just reopened. Tonight I
And how the ramp ascends in spirals towards the sky.
Merging with the scenery and embodying a milder,
More domestic notion of perfection, on a human scale
Confines of this bland, accommodating structure
Made of souvenirs and emblems, like the hammock
Hanging in the backyard of an undistinguished
Just a block or two away from where I live now?
I usually walk along the street on Sunday,
Musing on how beautiful it seems, how aspects of it
Recapitulate the Oak Park house and studio, with
Open spaces buried in a labyrinthine interior,
A characteristic feature of his plans that made it
Difficult to find, although the hope was that in
In much the way that in the course of getting older,
And trying to reconstruct the paths that led me here,
I found myself pulled backwards through these old,
Uncertain passages, distracted by the details,
I lived a long time as both woman and girl it nearly killed me
Such as the oaks neither shake nor fidget in observation
And the objects worth discussing dissipate oh how they leak
Away from the creeds claiming one can get ahead of the pain
By naming see how the green will change you it really will
I went into the green with a vine across my back and from the mud
Came the pattern before the light could enter light turned
And denied us, the moss struggled toward the yellow
A fine pollen came up from the world and the road made this
Across patches of burned up grass untender and lines perpendicular
A body in a cloak upon a road rolling sweetly through the mind
Place this road in some distant future just like that foregone past
Get head of the pain the ages counsel, make plenty of money

Cut back the stems an inch to keep in bloom.
enclosed inside the flowers.
Who knew what was cut
could heal again, the green wounds close,
stitching themselves together?

and white, will bloom awhile, then wither.
You sit in an unlit room and watch
the vase throw crystal shadows through the dark.

separate each bloom and cut
where you last measured. Did you know
Venus was said to turn into a virgin
each time she bathed? She did it
as a mark of love. She did it

so as to please her lovers. Perhaps,
overwhelmed by pain,
she eventually stopped bathing
to feel the green nubs stripped, watch the stems

inside your crystal vase. And yet
the flowers by themselves are nothing:
only a refraction of color that,
in a week or two, will be thrown out.
Day by day, the water lowers. The red-

and-white heads droop, blacken at the stems.
But what is the point of pain if it heals?
Some things should last forever, instructs
says one god. Shame, says another.

Venus heads, they call these flowers.
have to call the florist up.

you sit before the crystal
vase refracting you in pieces
through the dark. You watch
the pale skin bloom inside it, wither.
You petal, inch by inch.
You turn red and white together.

Morning and evening
Maids heard the goblins cry:
Come buy, come buy:
Apples and quinces,
Lemons and oranges,
Melons and raspberries,
Swart-headed mulberries,
Wild free-born cranberries,
Crab-apples, dewberries,
Pine-apples, blackberries,
All ripe together
Morns that pass by,
Fair eves that fly;
Come buy, come buy:
Our grapes fresh from the vine,
Pomegranates full and fine,
Dates and sharp bullaces,
Rare pears and greengages,
Damsons and bilberries,
Taste them and try:
Currants and gooseberries,
Bright-fire-like barberries,
Figs to fill your mouth,
Citrons from the South,
Sweet to tongue and sound to eye;

          Evening by evening
Among the brookside rushes,
Crouching close together
In the cooling weather,
With clasping arms and cautioning lips,
With tingling cheeks and finger tips.
Pricking up her golden head:
We must not buy their fruits:
Who knows upon what soil they fed
Hobbling down the glen.

Down the glen tramp little men.
One hauls a basket,
One bears a plate,
One lugs a golden dish
Of many pounds weight.
How fair the vine must grow
Whose grapes are so luscious;
How warm the wind must blow
Their offers should not charm us,
She thrust a dimpled finger
In each ear, shut eyes and ran:
Curious Laura chose to linger
Wondering at each merchant man.
One like a ratel tumbled hurry skurry.
She heard a voice like voice of doves
Cooing all together:
They sounded kind and full of loves
In the pleasant weather.

Like a rush-imbedded swan,
Like a lily from the beck,
Like a moonlit poplar branch,
Like a vessel at the launch
When its last restraint is gone.

          Backwards up the mossy glen
With their shrill repeated cry,
They stood stock still upon the moss,
Leering at each other,
Brother with queer brother;
Signalling each other,
Brother with sly brother.
One set his basket down,
One began to weave a crown
Of tendrils, leaves, and rough nuts brown
(Men sell not such in any town);
Of dish and fruit to offer her:
Laura stared but did not stir,
In tones as smooth as honey,
The rat-faced spoke a word
Of welcome, and the snail-paced even was heard;
One parrot-voiced and jolly
One whistled like a bird.

          But sweet-tooth Laura spoke in haste:
To take were to purloin:
I have no copper in my purse,
I have no silver either,
And all my gold is on the furze
That shakes in windy weather
Sweeter than honey from the rock,
Stronger than man-rejoicing wine,
She never tasted such before,
How should it cloy with length of use?
Fruits which that unknown orchard bore;
Then flung the emptied rinds away
And knew not was it night or day

          Lizzie met her at the gate
Full of wise upbraidings:
Twilight is not good for maidens;
Should not loiter in the glen
In the haunts of goblin men.
Do you not remember Jeanie,
How she met them in the moonlight,
Took their gifts both choice and many,
Ate their fruits and wore their flowers
Where summer ripens at all hours?
But ever in the noonlight
She pined and pined away;
Sought them by night and day,
Found them no more, but dwindled and grew grey;
Then fell with the first snow,
While to this day no grass will grow
Where she lies low:
I planted daisies there a year ago
That never blow.
I ate and ate my fill,
Yet my mouth waters still;
To-morrow night I will
Fresh on their mother twigs,
Cherries worth getting;
You cannot think what figs
My teeth have met in,
What melons icy-cold
Piled on a dish of gold
Too huge for me to hold,
What peaches with a velvet nap,
Pellucid grapes without one seed:
Odorous indeed must be the mead
Whereon they grow, and pure the wave they drink
With lilies at the brink,

          Golden head by golden head,
Like two pigeons in one nest
Like two blossoms on one stem,
Like two wands of ivory
Wind sang to them lullaby,
Lumbering owls forbore to fly,

staring from the end of the world

1 
Child of my winter, born 
When the new fallen soldiers froze 
When I was torn 

By love I could not still, 
By fear that silenced my cramped mind 
My peace in my will, 

All those days we could keep 
Your mind a landscape of new snow 
His fields asleep 

In their smooth covering, white 
As quilts to warm the resting bed 
For me to write, 

And thinks: Here lies my land 
Unmarked by agony, the lean foot 
And I have planned 

My chances to restrain 
It snows again. 

2 

3 
Comes to a puddle, lifts his feet 
Recoil to swing him through the weather, 

We read of cold war soldiers that 
Pain seeps up from some cavity 

For good, they sever and divide 

And nobody seems very pleased. 

It may help that a Chinese play 
Or Solomon himself might say 

4 

Spring is the cold wind's aftermath. 

petunias and dwarf marigold, 

5 
You are already growing 
Strange to me. 

Hey ding-a-ding-a-ding 
Or where I go 

Or when I sang for bedtime, Fox 
Went out on a chilly night, 
Before I went for walks 
And did not write; 

That are renewed long since; 
Outside the thick snow swarms 
Into my prints 

Dark cowbarns, huddled, still, 
Beyond to the blank field, 

Gnawed off, he cannot feel; 
Conceded to the jaw 
Of toothed, blue steel. 

6 

One Christmastime Fats Waller in a fur coat 
Each at an arm as he led them in a thick downy snowfall 

Across Thirty-Fourth Street into the busy crowd 
Chimes rang for change. In Toys, where my mother worked 

Over her school vacation, the crowd swelled and stood 
Filling the aisles, whispered at the fringes, listening 
To the sounds of the large, gorgeously dressed man, 

His smile bemused and exalted, lips boom-booming a bold 
Bass line as he improvised on an expensive, tinkly 

She put into my heart this scene from the romance of Joy, 
My father making the winning basket at the buzzer 

The brilliant black and white of the movies, texture 

Reflections that slid over the thick brass baton 
That worked the elevator. Happiness needs a setting: 
Shepherds and shepherdesses in the grass, kids in a store, 

And paper streamers twisted in two colors: what I felt 
Dancing close one afternoon with a thin blonde girl 

Was my amazing good luck, the pleased erection 
Stretching and stretching at the idea She likes me, 
She likes it, the thought of legs under a woolen skirt, 

Into the street we saw it had begun, the firm flakes 
Sticking, coating the tops of cars, melting on the wet 
Black street that reflected storelights, soft 

Separate crystals clinging intact on the nap of collar 
And cuff, swarms of them stalling in the wind to plunge 
Sideways and cluster in spangles on our hair and lashes, 

Melting to a fresh glaze on the bloodwarm porcelain 
Of our faces, Hey nonny-nonny boom-boom, the cold graceful 
Manna, heartfelt, falling and gathering copious 

As the air itself in the small-town main street 

II 

My unconceived heart in a way waiting somewhere like 
Wherever it goes in sleep. Later, my eyes opened 

And I woke up glad to feel the sunlight warm 
High up in the window, a brighter blue striping 
Blue folds of curtain, and glad to hear the house 

To balance my chest on the top rail, cheek 

With sets of double tooth-lines. Clinging 
With both arms, I grunted, pulled one leg over 
And stretched it as my weight started to slip down 

With some panic till my toes found the bottom rail, 
Thrilled, half-scared, still hanging high up 

With both hands from the spindles. Then lower 
Slipping down until I could fall to the floor 
With a thud but not hurt, and out, free in the house. 

Then softly down the hall to the other bedroom 
To push against the door; and when it came open 
More light came in, opening out like a fan 

So they woke up and laughed, as she lifted me 
Up in between them under the dark red blanket, 
We all three laughing there because I climbed out myself. 

Earlier still, she held me curled in close 
With everyone around saying my name, and hovering, 

As he held me up for the camera, and the pain buzzed 
Scaring me because it twisted right inside me; 
So when she took me and held me and I curled up, sucking, 

It was as if she had put me back together again 
So sweetly I was glad the hurt had torn me. 
She wanted to have made the whole world up, 

A letter I wrote my sister, who was having trouble 
Getting on with her, and read some things about herself 

That made her go to the telephone and call me up: 

Or having followed pain inside she owned her children 
From the inside out, or made us when she named us, 

III 

Made me Robert. She took me with her to a print-shop 
Where the man struck a slug: a five-inch strip of lead 
With the twelve letters of my name, reversed, 

Raised along one edge, that for her sake he made 
For me, so I could take it home with me to keep 
And hold the letters up close to a mirror 

Or press their shapes into clay, or inked from a pad 
Onto all kinds of paper surfaces, onto walls and shirts, 

The little characters fading from my arm, the gift 
Always ready to be used again. Gifts from the heart: 
Her giving me her breast milk or my name, Waller 

Showing off in a store, for free, giving them 
A thrill as someone might give someone an erection, 

Eighteen shucked fresh oysters and the cold bottle 
Sweating in its ribbon, surprise, happy birthday! 
So what if the giver also takes, is after something? 

So what if with guile she strove to color 
A scarf or bit of sleeve of her favorite color 

Or sudden jazz for becoming what we want? I want 

The generator flashlight Italo gave me one Christmas: 
One squeeze and the gears visibly churning in the amber 

Pistol-shaped handle hummed for half a minute 
In my palm, the spare bulb in its chamber under my thumb, 
Secret; or, the knife and basswood Ellen gave me to whittle. 

And until the gift of desire, the heart is a titular, 
Insane king who stares emptily at his counselors 
For weeks, drools or babbles a little, as word spreads 

In the taverns that he is dead, or an impostor. One day 
A light concentrates in his eyes, he scowls, alert, and points 

Generals and courtiers groan, falling to work 
With a frantic movement of farriers, cooks, builders, 
The city thrown willing or unwilling like seed 

(While the brain at the same time may be settling 
Into the morning Chronicle, humming to itself, 

IV 

Toward war, new forms of worship or migration. 
Of the little two-family house, and into the Woods: 

Guns, chevrons, swordplay, a scarf of sooty smoke 
Rolled upwards from a little cratewood fire 
Under the low tent of a Winesap fallen 

With fingers rooting in the dirt, the old orchard 
Smothered among the brush of wild cherry, sumac, 
Sassafras and the stifling shade of oak 

In the strip of overgrown terrain running 
East from the train tracks to the ocean, woods 
Of demarcation, where boys went like newly-converted 

Christian kings with angels on helmet and breastplate, 
Bent on blood or poaching. There are a mountain and a woods 

Of four stayed half-aware it was past dark 
In a crude hut roasting meat stolen from the A&P 

And scared us home to catch hell: We were worried, 
Where have you been? In the Woods. With snakes and tramps. 
An actual hobo knocked at our back door 

One morning, declining food, to get hot water. 
He shaved on our steps from an enamel basin with brush 
And cut-throat razor, the gray hair on his chest 

And the otherlife of snakes, poison oak, boxcars. 
Were the trees cleared first for the trains or the orchard? 

Walking home by the street because it was dark, 
That night, the smoke-smell in my clothes was like a bearskin. 
Where the lone hunter and late bird have seen us 

Pass and repass, the mountain and the woods seem 
In a song or poem seemed cloaked laments 

For the woods when Indians made lodges from the skin 
Of birch or deer. When the mysterious lighted room 
Of a bus glided past in the mist, the faces 

Passing me in the yellow light inside 
Were a half-heard story or a song. And my heart 
Moved, restless and empty as a scrap of something 

Blowing in wide spirals on the wind carrying 
The sound of breakers clearly to me through the pass 
Between the blocks of houses. The horn of Roland 

V 

But what was it I was too young for? On moonless 
Nights, water and sand are one shade of black, 
And the creamy foam rising with moaning noises 

Charges like a spectral army in a poem toward the bluffs 
Before it subsides dreamily to gather again. 
I thought of going down there to watch it a while, 

Feeling as though it could turn me into fog, 
Or that the wind would start to speak a language 

Burning in some certain misted window I passed, 
A house or store or tap-room where the strangers inside 
Would recognize me, locus of a new life like a woods 

Or orchard that waxed and vanished into cloud 
Like the moon, under a spell. Shrill flutes, 
Oboes and cymbals of doom. My poor mother fell, 

And after the accident loud noises and bright lights 
Hurt her. And heights. She went down stairs backwards, 

Over the years, she got better. But I was lost in music; 
The cold brazen bow of the saxophone, its weight 
At thumb, neck and lip, came to a bloodwarm life 

Jacket and pants with a satin stripe I aspired 
To the roughneck elegance of my Grandfather Dave. 

Sometimes, playing in a bar or at a high school dance, I felt 
My heart following after a capacious form, 

Thrum, come-wallow and then a little screen 
Of quicker notes goosing to a fifth higher, winging 
To clang-whomp of a major seventh: listen to me 

Listen to me, the heart says in reprise until sometimes 
In the course of giving itself it flows out of itself 
All the way across the air, in a music piercing 

As the kids at the beach calling from the water Look, 
Look at me, to their mothers, but out of itself, into 
The listener the way feeling pretty or full of erotic revery 

Makes the one who feels seem beautiful to the beholder 

Yearning further into giving itself into the air, breath 
Strained into song emptying the golden bell it comes from, 
The pure source poured altogether out and away.

[1]
I seem to see you pause here still:
all the children still.

foxes down foxholes sigh,
surely the English heart quails, stunned.
I doubt if Simon than this blast, that sea,
spares from his rigour for your poetry
who care. Both of our worlds unhanded us. Lie stark,

from the centuries it.
years, over interims; or not;
to a long stranger; or not; shimmer & disappear.

Jaw-ript, rot with its wisdom, rending then;
then not. When the mouth dies, who misses you?
Your master never died,
Pockmarkt & westward staring on a haggard deck
it seems I find you, young. I come to check,
I come to stay with you,
and the Governor, & Father, & Simon, & the huddled men.

unfavouring, frightened us;
bone-sad cold, sleet, scurvy; so were ill
many as one day we could have no sermons;
crowding & waiting: waiting.
And the day itself he leapt ashore young Henry Winthrop

(delivered from the waves; because he found
off their wigwams, sharp-eyed, a lone canoe
across a tidal river,
that water glittered fair & blue
shouldered on a glad day
hard on the glorious feasting of thanksgiving) drowned.

at which my heart rose,
with brackish water, we would sing.

but I do gloss for You.
Strangers & pilgrims fare we here,
declaring we seek a City. Shall we be deceived?
and that he is able to

and still we may unpack.
Wolves & storms among, uncouth
board-pieces, boxes, barrels vanish, grow
indoors, and I am Ruth

vellum I palm, and dream. Their forest dies
a nightingale is throbbing.
and I am not one chance
for an unknown cry or a flicker of unknown eyes.

flaps like a shooting soul
might in such weather Heaven send.
Succumbing half, in spirit, to a salmon sash
I must be disciplined,
in arms, against that one, and our dissidents, and myself.

Versing, I shroud among the dynasties;
quaternion on quaternion, tireless I phrase
anything past, dead, far,
sacred, for a barbarous place.
abstract didactic rime I read appalled
harassed for your fame
mistress neither of fiery nor velvet verse, on your knees

hopeful & shamefast, chaste, laborious, odd,
so they hug & are mean
with themselves, and I cannot be thus.
Why then do I repine, sick, bad, to long
after what must not be? I lie wrong
once more. For at fourteen
I found my heart more carnal and sitting loose from God,

That year for my sorry face
so-much-older Simon burned,
He to me ill lingeringly, learning to shun
a bliss, a lightning blood
vouchsafed, what did seem life. I kissed his Mystery.

when my eyes unlid, sad.
at twenty-one. Ambition mines, atrocious, in.

Food endless, people few, all to be done.
As pippins roast, the question of the wolves
turns & turns.
Fangs of a wolf will keep, the neck
whispered & was stockt.

under my withering heart, O seasoned heart
God grudged his aid.
All things else soil like a shirt.
Simon is much away. My executive stales.
but my patience is short.
I revolt from, I am like, these savage foresters

impassive & scant, belie their murderous cries
when quarry seems to show.
Again I must have been wrong, twice.
Unwell in a new way. Can that begin?
God brandishes. O love, O I love. Kin,
gather. My world is strange
and merciful, ingrown months, blessing a swelling trance.

Stalling. He let go. Come back: brace
my back cracks like a wrist
shame I am voiding oh behind it is too late

hide me forever I work thrust I must free
now I all muscles & bones concentrate
what is living from dying?
Simon I must leave you so untidy
Monster you are killing me Be sure
I can can no longer
and it passes the wretched trap whelming and I am me

1. homilies from home

And in the house of fact, when you take off your shirt,
you can hear your shirt cry out, Facts are the floor, facts
are how you make the right side talk to the left.

can see it breaking into fits of weeping.
Now that even our eyes have their dedicated poverties,

now that even our eyes are chained to their slavish occupations,
whatever the soul lacks drains the soul to nothing.
I hate to admit it, but even the house of fact is a house of ruin.

2. rest

The strange is done with, over,
the strange that late at night you returned
to chat with again and again. No longer will anyone
wait for me in my corner where

good is bad, where that tight-lipped morning
of tears by the bay means nothing anymore
to anyone. To be cleared of the inks that stain
my ankles while watching my eyes go blind in the mirror

is the kind of rest that the seventh day promises
but never brings. Instead, the species
climbs aboard the ark of copulation

and ignores the forty days and nights of rain.
And the much-talked-of soul that the rain denies
burrows deep into the mud of so much pain.

3. spider

Look at the spider with the enormous body and tiny head,
a spider of no color: today, when I kneel
down to look at it more closely, its many arms nailed
to a many-armed cross are a prayer in a code that only God,

invisible to my eyes, which guided it like a pilot
through the wilderness of space,
no longer steer its legs across the intricate,

almost-not-thereness of its web. Each thread
it spins with the finality of fate divides its head
from its body. And the poor thing,

Just look at its abdomen, huge as the stone blocking

4. if the sun should blacken to an asterisk

Honestly, when I look at life straight,
or that Saint Peter being nailed to the cross

of my humanity, but because my eyes
and cigar that will outlive me. So try to save a day

for when there are no days, reason with the lens
inside every healing wound, witness how your
own inner grace, gnawing at itself, gets baptized

in phosphates of hemlock and error.
And so what if the sunset arrives from Athens?
So what if no trace of anyone survives?

5. the last to be excused

Remember the old aunts, sarcastic,
chain-smoking, gesturing with their canes,
scoring point after point with their widowed lungs?

How was I to eat with them as they pushed
around their plates not peas and carrots
but distance and disdain for their silly nephew

still trying, at his age, to forget
how being old is as new to the old

even their glued-together, half-cracked
china radiates impatience for the pity
that the young want them to want.

as if they still felt her eyes on how

they handled their knives, forks, spoons,
making each bite harder to swallow.

in the pitcher, no eternally dying father
served up like canned spinach and corn,
no brooches of affection their absent lips

pin to the air. And as that silence
left alone to dine with the nothingness

The table will be set with shadows,

and all the dead mothers come to this repast
will sit down on chairs of dust
in the wake of that last supper

smothered by that dark where no one can tell

the knife blade from the handle,
or the food from the plate, or the plate

6. the eternal dice 

omg, it makes me cry to admit that I am human;

Oh sure, you claimed you raised me from the dust,

You know nothing of those Marias who split for good.

But in your always everywhere hard partying with perfection

you feel nothing of the pain of your creation.

Today, in my middle-aged pupils, I see the glare of candles
lit for my death-row vigil. omg, old gambler, take up

in the fated luck you dole out to the universe

omg, in this night gone deaf and blind,

is just a single die whose edges have grown rounded
by rolling too many eons through the battering sky

and nobody now can stop it until it rolls into a hole,
the vast hole, omg, inside a single molecule.

7. the other garden

In the Garden there was a spider.
And because the man knelt beside him, the spider
overheard him, the agony of his prayer

any other direction than into the web stretching out
no matter which way the fly veers. The spider
felt the threads of all being vibrate

to the prayer of the man praying to his father
to let this cup pass. But on the cross, when the man cried out
to his father not to abandon him, his father

did abandon him. And so the spider
vowed to weave a web so tightly around the father that the harder

If it rains tonight, will a raindrop be my cell?
Will the bars the sky lets down
take one look at me and turn to steel?
Now that the hot afternoon is finally done,

done the cups of tea we drank with your mother,
I want to ask the rain to yank my strings
back a thousand years. But even back that far,
will the rain still be my prison?

To be lost in the minutiae
of our vacations from the soul, to forget
the Vedic threads spun out beyond my end,

to press against your breasts obedient
to the purest pulses. Yeah, sure. Make the story
of my life the story of my never having been.
How long do you want to go on being the person you think you are?
How Long, a city in China

The nouns come toward you
"Knee how," they say
To the cluster of synonyms also approaching
How long, how long, baby, how long?
Let me know
if you ever change your mind
about leaving, leaving me behind
or at least tell yourself
before you find yourself on that train
winding its way through the mountains of How Much Province

The ten thousand yellow leaves of the ginkgo tree
kerplumfed onto the sidewalk on East 12th Street,
a deep-pile carpet of them on the roof of the parked car
proving that Nature does have a sense of humor,
though if a sense of humor falls in the woods
and there is no one there to hear it. . . .

for everyone has clustered alongside the railroad track
for the arrival of night and its shooting stars with trails like pigtails
I am among them and I know this track is mine
though it does not belong to me

Nothing belongs to me

for at this moment the boxes are being stacked
to make way for you to move through them,
reading their labels: family photos, Pick-Up Stix, miscellaneous
and the song of the porcelain, the celadon, and Delft itself
vibrating How long, how long
will this baby take to depart?

But I don't want to think about the past
I want to be the past,
with everything I've ever known and done
spread out on a two-dimensional plane
erected vertically and moving through the space I occupy on Earth

There is a lot more room left in me
though everyone I've ever known who's died is there
My mother my father say hello
to Ted and Joe and laugh with them
though Joe knows they are crying too
and that Ted is crying
and it sounds like laughter

They do this to console me
and I let them do it, to console them

What? I didn't hear you
or rather I heard you
but I couldn't make out what you said

The phone lay in its cradle
pretending to be asleep
and the blinking light made you think
that it was dreaming and that
or were they supposed to call you?

Supposed. What does that mean.
It means no more than the contours of the landscape
that is as beautiful as the contours in John Ashbery's poetry
but it doesn't mean anything
unless you turn your mind on its side
and let it lie there
inert, and from this inertia
will arise a wing, the white wing
of a bird that has no anything else,
only this one wing
that folds and unfolds itself
like the magnetic field it rises above
in wave after wave after wave.

Then it's back to basics:
If you bone or debone a chicken
it comes out the same,
if you dust a cake with sugar
you add something
but if you dust your house you take away.
Oh to be a rock or a stone or even a pebble!
Momentarily,
for there is much that is unattractive about being a rock.
For one thing, I wouldn't be able
to finish this poem, I would sit here petrified
until they carted me away
to a park to serve as ornamental sculpture,
if I were lucky.

Now that you are convinced of something
that you already believed, the wallpaper becomes a fact
in the home of Anne and Fairfield Porter,
in the upstairs hallway and the bedroom
where Jimmy stayed, the wallpaper that here and there
was curling off the wall so Joe could tear it off
and glue it to a big white sheet of paper.
There is no other wallpaper
I would ever want.
Now the wallpaper goes away,
back on the wall in 1969
where I stood and gazed at it for a long time
and then went downstairs
to add coal to Fairfield's stove,
the big Aga he had shipped all the way from Sweden
because he was very determined to have it.
All day its warmth rose up to the second floor
and caressed the wallpaper.
Do you mind my going on like this?
You want something else, right?
Perhaps you want what you think poetry should give you,
but poetry doesn't give anyone anything,
it simply puts the syllables on the table
and lets you rearrange them in your head,
which you can do unless your head is a square
the size of the tabletop.
So why don't you lift your head off the table
and go lie down somewhere
more comfortable
and not worry about anything,
including the list of things to worry about
that you keep revising in your head,
for there is a slot through which that list
can slip and float down like a baby in a rocking crib,
down to a comfy dreamland
and be transformed into a list of gods whose jokes are wonderful.
But when the alarm goes off
the jokes don't seem funny
but what? (You weren't even asleep.)
It's not something you feel you're going to remember,
it's not as if you can go down the alphabet
until you get to a letter that has a special hum
because it's the first letter of the name
you can't quite recall,
it's not as if you can look just to the side of where
you think a dim star is and thereby have it magically appear.
The glow is gone,
and knowing it comes back sometimes
is little consolation.
But I'll take it
and go not to a deserted island
but to the factory where they make the bottles
that are washed ashore with a message inside,
and though the message has been blurred by water stains
that poetry is something written by someone other than the poet
to someone other than the reader.
though in some of your works no chapeau,
for in them it is not a bottle but a test tube
one finds one's finger stuck in.

What do you want to do with your life?
is a question asked of a young person
but slightly modified for an older one:
What do you want to do with the rest of your life?
Having control is an illusion we like to be fooled by:
the pinball machine of experience has bounced us
off one thing and onto another bing bing bing!
Life might be like a pinball machine
but it isn't one, and the trouble is
that you might be like a person
and you are one, as if in reverie,
but then it all seems crambe.

And so Sir Thomas Browne walks in
with an insane look on his face, he is searching
for examples of the number 5, do you
have any new ones for him? If not
please step aside, and out he goes
into the garden, eyes locked
onto the vegetation, the afternoon light
on the back of his coat.

You're relieved he didn't stay long.

For God's sake
here he comes again.
Lock the door!
But he performs osmosis
and becomes the door and then
the room and then you!
And you go about the house
looking for examples of the number 5
and you don't know why or where
it will all lead to.

But I do.
Who said that?
I did.
Why did you say that?
I didn't.

Brimming the trees with song
they flood July, spill over into
August pulsing lovecries,
our cat brought me lay, legs folded
neatly, on clear wings as on a shroud, green
and white, fizzing now and then,
but when I threw it spread
wings and zagged in a wide curve into
the sweetgum tree where presently
its dry buzzsaw whined for some
significant other to auger down
into dark dense earth and gnaw at
the roots of things,
sans eyes, sans wings, sans
song for seventeen years or so.

As daylight sharpens, deer slip back
into the woods. I wonder what a deer,
when danger grows too bright,
makes of a world whose darker,
truer memories in ear
and nose must solve the dazzle of
our alien eyes, more surgical
at stripping off its cover, at masking selves
as downwind leaves.
that pain cannot be felt
until self-consciousness
has been achieved, and they had programmed in
that level, so they said, of artificial pain.
of a Mnemonist, the man infallibly
remembered everything, but all perceptions
were unlike ours. Hearing, he tasted: sweet, bitter,
salty; heard neon colors; rough or silky, icy or
bloodwarm words: laid them like eggs aside on streets
his memory walked stolidly along,
walked back to get them when he needed to.
had set it carefully beneath a lamp
whose bulb was burnt out.
Bud opens and
is marigold, bird touched
by sunlight sings,
mind thinks:
I am. Still,
as the old man put it, coming out
into the light we wawl
and cry. I wonder,
in this darklit galaxy,
how that song is heard.

I could not pity your pain but I pitied the branches
Losing what little the frost had left them to hold.
I could not warm you with sorrow; I turned to the sparrows,
Clustered like heavy brown blossoms puffed out by the cold.

They could not help me. I looked at my hands; they were helpless;
Strange and detached, less related to me than the birds.
Baffled, I called on the mind: it carried me, floundering,
Lost among meaningless phrases, tossed in a welter of words.

Too great for my blundering comfort, your anguish confused me.
From a great distance, I saw you standing alone.
Frozen and stark, in a black iron circle of silence,
I could not pity your pain; I could scarcely pity my own.

Your dying was a difficult enterprise.
First, petty things took up your energies,
Already with a kind of clumsy stealth
Distanced you from the habits of your health.
Without import. But then the spinal tap.
Every half-hour with the same short cry
Of mild outrage, before immediately
Slipping into the nightmare once again
Empty of content but the drip of pain.
The hedonistic body basks within
In a dry mouth. You had gone on from me
A gust of morphine hid you. Back in sight
Jammed down your throat so that you could not speak.
State for what holds and rests were hidden in it.
Thick with the complicating circumstance
We talked between our sleeping bags, below
A molten field of stars five years ago:
Though I was tired and begged you to leave off.

Now you were tired, and yet not tired enough
Feeling as uncompleted as a child
Rueful, at your own silliness.
Long-term, precisely, when they gave the shot
And pulled a pillow round beside your head.
Achieving your completeness, in a way.

Of being ejected with some violence
Where I was numb, into this garden plot
I was delivered into time again
And must have loved its fickleness a bit
Took over by betraying it into
The greatest of its inconsistencies
This difficult, tedious, painful enterprise.

The unsigned architecture of loneliness
is becoming taller, finding a way farther
above the horizontal flowering
of the Cold War, the peonies
and star asters of wild partisanship.
I have a shambling gait and lonely
hysteria, but no Terror. I am free
conception, to shamble past the bar where I
conceived adultery as a Terror
that would be endless, flowering
in great waves through air striated like chenille.
I walk for a long time and try to conjure
elsewhere in its early isolation.
I cannot. It is all redestinated
by the future like the loose balloons
a janitor recovers at 6 am
from cold light fixtures. The Cold War is ending.
Buildings are taller and have no names.

1.
The romance of every ideology
torments the romance of another. How
beautifully, in the beginning, in
the gale and embrace of isolation, boys
capered over a shambles and swore oaths.
The scent of urine in the hall at home
was righteousness. The beautiful nude
obscured by dust in a paperweight
was righteousness. Neglectful townships coming
into steep flower just as boys were flowering
the horizontal slag of government
by children. Only the insane allegiances
endure. The mad counterparts are lovers
passion cannot explain nor circumstances
restrict to the dead zones of irony.
A counterpart of end of the Cold War
is adultery. A counterpart
of loving a divided Berlin
unto death is fatherhood, the doting
maintenance of sons in vacant lots
continuing the wars of rubble
of nudes obscured by dust and vulgarity.

Romance torments romance. The most beautiful
moment of the twentieth century
galed and embraced the acrid smoky air
as the Red Army entered Berlin
as Hitler shriveled in the gasoline fire
as Red Army flags opened above Berlin
safeguarding the ruins of a changeless future.
Townships blackened even as they flowered.
Loose balloons cluttered the low sky and sun.
I walked for a long time and tried to conjure
the form of kindness. It was a domestic
animal confused in the tall grass.
Boys set fire to the grass. History
that opens flags opened the fire,
and Berlin, divided from Berlin,
began to love its children past all reason.

2.
My son reads sermons of pain and writes on walls.
He starves the ground
he walks on, preparing a dead city
to be worthy of its new flags, to shine
as exploded windows shine, raining down
for hours after the wrecking crews have gone.
I have a lover now who hates children.
The hatred floats inside of her, a weightless
and perfect emptiness. I thought
by making love to her I would conceive
nothing but Terror, outrage upon outrage,
a violence that would last my whole life
and free my son. I was ignorant as a balloon.

Across the luminous expressway, I see
the shapes of charred tenements castellated,
fading into the more tender shapes of night.
It may be the last night in history. Tomorrow
pulls down the Berlin Wall, pulls down my honor,
Tomorrow describes everything in detail.
It explains nothing. It does not teach my boy
that tenements are better than the future,
better that peace, more likely to produce
brothers than are the glassy hands of mornings
without end or walls denuded of their wire.
In the dead zone of irony before dawn,
only the cats cry, like martyrs in the flame.

3.
Gates everywhere. The Brandenburg. The Great
Gate of Kiev beneath which children stride
onto an invisible crescendo
disappearing into gasoline fires,
emerging as the new shapes of righteousness
in slow vans through the Brandenburg Gate.
Oaths are secret because none suspects
that they are kept. They thrust themselves towards us
unashamedly, like the insane homeless,
and we do not see them. In our loneliness,
we see a chance for love in betrayal,
not death. In our loneliness, we see the happy
triumph of glassy hands in free elections,
not the denuding of Berlin or wanderings
of children in vans reduced by fire
to black transparencies in the morning shade.
When Joan of Arc surrendered to the flames
a failed magician who had lover her cried out
too easy to be unreal or profitable.

I walk for a long time and try to conjure
the form of loneliness without Cold War.
It is ash upon ash, a chiaroscuro
aloft and on the ground, completely still.
Oaths are secret because none suspects
the desperation of every object, the child
in every atom of the misused world
thrust towards us, crying out whatever
sacred name it witnessed put to death
on the ascending music of a wall.
Our buildings are tall and have no names.
The parks grow glassy hands instead of flowers.

4.
Afterwards, the calm is piteous
but insubstantial as a smell of burn
that does not rise in smoke or dies with the fire.
Imagine walking out of a house at sunrise
and having to invent air, invent light
from nothing but untriggered memory.
All things beloved are recalled to pain.
Air recollected from the wrists of girls
braceleted for Confirmation, crossed.
Light recollected from between the cars
of night trains in a deep river valley
where islands in the river glowed like swans.
Air recollected form a ditch in flower.
in bare rooms, the grainy light of blondes.
Air recollected from religion.
Light recollected form the incensed clutch
of bodies before sunrise in the oaths
of a great and ignorant lost cause.

Imagine walking out of a house at sunrise
having spent the night in bed with a stranger.
Aloft and on the ground the calm
unfurls like flags without device or slogan.
The inconsequence of the day ahead
stirs airless atmospheres in darkness
visible as daylight but without shade.
Without Cold War, without the arbitrary
demarcation of cause from cause, of light
of memory, I cannot see to walk
avant garde of lonely architecture
breaks ground at the unwired heart of a city
that marks the capital of nothing now.

5.
A scratchy, recorded call to prayer crosses
the alley from one new building into mine.
The consolations of history are furtive,
then fugitive, then forgotten like a bar
of music that might have been obscene or sacred
once, in another city, in the days
before today. My son is well. He works
the public ground and needs no Antigone.
My lover sits beside him at dinner,
sharing a joke, unmapping the tall future
and its unbiased children, reinventing
plague wards. Romance forgives romance.

The early isolation of this gorgeous
century disappears into good works.
The future is best. To put a final stop
to the grotesque unmercy of martyrdom
and to the ruinous armies of mad boys
whose government is rape, whose justice
is a wall, revoke all partisanship,
adjourn the Terror. The future is best.
It unobscures the dusty nudes. It protects
the river islands and their glowing swans.
But when I need to die, who will light the fire?
What names shall I cry out and what music
burn to a black transparency in my heart?
The unborn have been revoked. They will not be kind.

In a light chocolatine room
with blackout windows,
syllables, crisscrossed
with a broken cloudiness
but cannot. My choice of sleep
or sky has no music of its own.
Oh, the baby cries. He howls and claws
like a wrongly minor red wolf
or disrobe the kind of housecoat
Whatever meaning the word itself
is covering, like underwear,
that meaning is so mere and meager
this morning. Mother. Baby.
of me: I was an egg
as usual scooping up
both possibilities,
or what I used to call
possibilities. I used
to be this way, so ontologically
greedy, wanting to be it all.
Serves me right.
My belief in the fluidity
of the self turns out to mean
my me is a flow of wellwater,
without the well, or the bucket,
a hole dug and seeping.
A kind of unwell, where
the ground reabsorbs
what it was displaced to give.
The drain gives meaning to the sieve.
As I said: a chicken who still
wants to be all potential.
Someone who springs
and falls, who cannot see
how many of us I have
Do I like us? Can I love us?
If anyone comes
I was here way, way first.
I have the breasts, godawful, and he
the lungs and we share the despair.
enough for either of us.
The father of the baby is sleepy
and present in his way, in the way
of fathers. He is devoted like
few fathers, and maybe hurts
like I hurt, like no fathers.
feels, not even these someones
who are also me. Do they hurt
tell me, or morse or sign: let
me know they know where and how
and why it hurts? Or something?
What is the point of other people,
help a person get that pain
will stick its shiv into anything,
just to get rid of the weapon
and because it can? For if we share
ourselves then they, too, must
also be in so much pain.
I can hear it. Oh, my loves.
The wood of the crib, the white
glow of the milk (which must
have siphoned off the one
and only pure part of me, leaving
me with what, toxicity
or sin or mush?), the awful softness.
too easy to spill. I make more
and more of myself in order
to make more and more of the baby.
He takes it, this making. And somehow
I run to the bathroom, run
to the kitchen, run to the crib
These places just scare up as needed,
the wires that move my hands
to the sink, to the baby,
to the breast are electrical.
One must be in shock to say so,
like a car accident or Minnesota taxes.
A total disaster, this sack of liquid
flesh which yowls and leaks
not the baby. Me, this puddle
of a middle, this utilized vessel,
cracked hull, divine
we all got here. Deform
following the function . . .
But what about me? I whisper
secretly and to think,
around these parts used to be
what is now this intimate
terror and squalor.
My eyes burned out at three a.m. and again
at six and eleven. This is why the clock
is drowning, as I said earlier.
Tiny self, along with a tiny self.
babe, then and now.
Perhaps he always will,
though thoughts of the future
seem like science fiction novels
I never finished reading.
Their ends like red nerves
chopped off by cleaver, not aliens,
this very moment, saving nothing for later.
He howls with such fury and clarity
I must believe him.
No god has the power
to make me believe anything,
yet I happen to know
this baby knows a way out.
This dark hole closing in on me
how to get through
the shock and the godlessness
and the rictus of crushed flesh,
into the rest of my life.

One evening at a party; a man I liked enormously
Preferred Athens; Greece seems to me a country
The whole mind of night that I know so well
Of falls ... No, it was that this dark was the deep, sensual dark
Spread to reveal the illuminated nipples of
The white buds lost in those fields of ever-deepening gentians,
Above me, the inverted reflection of a last,

The spread ripples of the opiate night ... And Nico
And deep within the pupil of her left eye,
I could see, at the most remote end of the receding,
At the small aperture of the black telescope of the pupil,
Silver, lit by the ragged shards of starlight, reflecting
Some years later, I saw Nico on stage in New York, singing
Obscured by a florescence that reveals her simple, deadly
Fanning her pale, chalky hair out along its currents,
The sad, lucent malevolence of the heavens, falling ...
Then forever ...

The fellow talking to himself is me,
Though I don't know it. That's to say, I see
Him every morning shave and comb his hair
And then lose track of him until he starts to care,
In front of his computer, in a battered leather chair
That needs to be thrown out . . . then I lose track
Until he strides along the sidewalk on the attack
This guy is, glaring at strangers in the street!
Completely crazy but not at all insane.
He's hot but there's frostbite in his brain.
He's hot but freezing cold, and oh so cool.
He's been called a marvelously elegant ghoul.
But with a torn rotator cuff, even an elegant fawn
Has to go through shoulder seizures to get his jacket on.
He manages spastically. His left shoulder's gone.
It means, in pain, he's drastically awake at dawn.
A friend of his with pancreatic cancer, who will die,
Is not in pain so far, and she will try
To palliate her death, is what her life is now.
The fellow's thinking to himself, Yes but how?
Riding a motorcycle very fast is one way to.
The moon and stars rapidly enter you
While you excrete the sun. You ride across the earth
Looking for a place to lay the eggs of your rebirth.
The eggs crack open and out comes everyone.
The chicks chirp, and it's begun, and it's fun.
You keep on writing till you write yourself away,
The eggs crack open and out comes everyone.
Speaking of someone else for a change, not me,
There was that time in Stockholm when, so strangely,
Outside a restaurant, in blinding daylight, a tiny bird
Circled forever around us and then without a word
Lightly, lightly landed on my head and settled there
And you burst into tears. I was unaware
That ten years before the same thing had happened just
After your young daughter died and now it must
Have been Maria come back from the dead a second time to speak
And receive the recognition we all seek.

Give me more love or more disdain;
      The torrid, or the frozen zone,
Bring equal ease unto my pain;
      The temperate affords me none;
Either extreme, of love, or hate,
Is sweeter than a calm estate.

Give me a storm; if it be love,
      Like Danae in that golden show'r
I swim in pleasure; if it prove
      Disdain, that torrent will devour
My vulture-hopes; and he's possess'd
Of heaven, that's but from hell releas'd.

Then crown my joys, or cure my pain;
Give me more love, or more disdain.

The question is not how like the animals we are
But how we got that way. We laugh, for what is a suicide note
But the epitaph of an emotion? Few of us die out in the open;
And when you say thesis, I say antithesis,
Plant them on opposing cliffs and then build a footbridge
Between them, seemingly flimsy yet sturdy enough in fact
To support a battalion. Hidden behind trees, we watch
The soldiers march across it, single file, too scared
To look down. We cheer them all, all except the boy
In the fairy tale who knew no fear. Him we pity.
He laughs open-eyed, ready to die as we were not.
He is one of us, all right, but better, stronger, stranger.
He asks for more fear than anyone can bear.
II.
The guilty had three choices: awkward chords of candor,
Silence returned triumphant, and the journey resumed
In darkness, though the sky above was classically blue.
Everyone kept his opinion to himself
As harmony dictated, and effigies of Tristan and Isolde
Accompanied their stubborn footsteps across the wild
Terrain. Yet the longing for a loud catharsis
Out of these clouds and heartfelt headaches,
Like ravished children in the glory of a snowball fight
After school, and never again have to descend,
Who would not abandon these erotic shipwrecks
III.
At a festival of conceptual art in Cairo,
I saw a tank buried entirely in snow.
I knew then that silence is the source
Of all music, all laughter, all thought, and so
I stuffed pebbles in my mouth and stood by the sea
And roared my defiance of the waves. It was here,
Years before, that our plane and its shadow
Converged: I ran from the fire, carrying the flames
In my arms. I ran and ran, feeling like a man
A beach at all: the sand beneath me was snow,
Is snow, and the spears in the desert sky look like stars.
Who heard the crimson explosion, and ran. And ran.
IV.
This place looks a lot like an empty railway station,
A place whose smoke and fog Monet dissolved
Into a chorus of colors. There we stood, my love and I,
Having made our vows under the suspended clock,
Hero and bride. But as we walked away, side by side,
Of the crowd, and foreign languages spoken loud,
We knew our exile had already begun, could hear
At the end of the tunnel, where the battlefields begin.
V.
Paradise was hardly what Psyche
With her bleeding blackberries and nervous orgasms
Could have foretold, enjoyed,
And renounced for the sake of some querulous abstraction
Designed to keep us unhappy but alive.
Call it civilization. Call our disobedience instinctive.
Or say we obeyed an angry muse, who ordered us to dance.
You face your former self, and grieve over incidents
Scarcely recalled, and eat without pleasure, and drink
In the revelation of our nakedness, we danced.
VI.
We feel free. In the other room the true believers remain,
The ones who insist that evil is real, the only real thing.
Cannibals and missionaries they are, accomplices in sin,
Greedy for punishment, to inflict or endure it.
We are glad to leave them behind, glad not to have to hear
Their chants and wails. Down the elevator we go
And out into the canyon created by skyscraper shadows.
Yet even we, dedicated as we are to good living,
Sometimes walk around with a lost look on our faces,
As if the blessing for a piece of fruit or cup of wine
Had suddenly come to mind, though cup and plate are empty;
Had come to mind and faded almost instantly away.
VII.
Admit it: you used to walk around thinking there had
To be a reason for things, for everything. That way
Paranoia lies. Not a science of syllables, the solitude
You even thought you lived for them, until the first death
(A nervous uncle broke the news when you landed at Kennedy)
And the first marriage (you stayed up all night and read
 Beyond the Pleasure Principle, a fair description
Of your lovemaking). It seems that new myths are needed
And consumed all the time by folks like you. Each erases the last,
In which the tigers of wrath become the tigers of repose.
VIII.
Go back to the beginning, to the first fist fight.
They played for high stakes those days. The penalty for losing
Was death or slavery, take your pick. To spare a life
Was the mark of the master; the mark of his slave
Was fear. Noble savage, nothing. Forget about paradise.
The syllable that ends it also lends it its poignancy,
Since we go on wanting what we can scarcely bear.
Go back, go back, back to when god became a swan
With beautiful wounded wings, and raped the astonished maiden.
Back to the dream that stays real when you wake up,
Accustomed to your hunger and clinging to it,
Like a panther accustomed to his cage. Go back.
IX.
A slap in the face, and the face burns with shame.
Anger comes later, comes stranger, looking for someone to blame.
their sails whiter than those
of the yachts in the bay, they come and go
on winged feet, most of them, or in sensible shoes.
July, and I should be climbing among stones
or diving, but for broken bones,
from the rocks below.
I try to read
a new novel set aside;
but a sword-swift pain
in the left shoulderblade, the result
of a tumble in Sheridan Square, makes reading difficult:
writing you can do in your head.
It starts to rain
on the sea,
suddenly dark, the pier,
the gardens and the church spires of Dun Laoghaire.
You would think it was suddenly October
as smoke flaps, the yachts tack violently
and those caught in the downpour
run for cover.
But in a few
minutes the sun shines again,
the leaves and hedges glisten as if with dew
in that fragrant freshness after rain
when the world seems made anew
before confusion, before pain;
and I think of you,
a funny-face
but solemn, with the sharpest mind I know,
a thoughtful creature of unconscious grace
bent to your books in the sun or driving down
to New York for an evening on the town.
Doors open wherever you go
in that furious place;
for you are the light
the old poets saw gleam in the morning mist.
When you walk down Fifth Avenue in your lavender suit,
your pony eyes opaque, I am the one
beside you, and life is bright
with the finest and best.
And I have seen,
as you have not, such is your modesty,
men turn to watch your tangle of golden hair,
your graceful carriage and unhurried air
as if you belonged to history
You might have been
a saint or a great
courtesan, anachronistic now
in some ways, in some ways more up-to-date
than the most advanced of those we know.
While you sit on your sun-porch in Connecticut
re-reading Yeats in a feminist light
I am there with you.

The television in The Deer Hunter is in Clairton, Pennsylvania. Everything is still at
calm, all is bright. I sing in English while my father is in Vietnam. American wives
are in immeasurable pain and so is my mother. American soldiers are pushing a hel-
icopter to the right side of the TV screen. Behind the soldiers is number 19. It stands
calm and bright, looking down at the flight platform below. Nobody is crying. Num-
child. And Godzilla is still crying. Hannah ditches the helicopter in the sea. Now
the helicopter. The chopper blades tilt, making a diagonal line across the entire
helicopter and its blades are perfectly vertical to the South China Sea. The chopper
is now engulfed by the sea, white with foam. Sayonara, Saigon! THIS SEEMS TO
BE THE LAST CHAPTER IN THE HISTORY OF AMERICAN INVOLVEMENT IN VIET-
NAM. Now everything appears in the center of the screen. Helicopter is everything.
in action somewhere in Cambodia, filming carpet bombing, my mother said. O the
LARGEST SINGLE MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE IN THE HISTORY OF AMERICA IT-
Sayonara, Saigon! HILARY BROWN, ABC NEWS ABOARD THE ATTACK AIRCRAFT
buttons on History's blouse.

though only that morning, I'd bent my head at the bell
and with the host on my tongue, mumbled thanks.

I told the nurses jokes,
newly precocious, but too old

at twelve to be anything
but a patient. I slouched in my robe
among the other child-guests of St. Joseph,

the parrot-eyed scald masks,
the waterheads and harelips,
the fat girl with the plastic shunt.

The old crippled nun on her wheeled
platform dispensed her half-witted blessings,
then was gone like the occasional covered gurneys

sliding by my numbered door. Gone
orderly as dusk in the brick courtyard:

the blank windows curtained one by one.
I could not abide that yearning face
calling me home. Like the Gauls,

in my penciled translations: I saw
Caesar was my home. Through the streets
of the occupied city, his gold mask rose, implacable.

I imagined pain not as pain
but the flickering light embedded

in the headboard, the end
of the snake-wire uncoiling from
the nurses' station. The painkiller winked

in its paper cup, its bleak chirp
meant respect should be paid
for the way I too wielded oblivion,

staring at the wall till six,
gifts unopened in her lap,

the early dark deepening between us.

At the Mind Museum, you can walk to the back,
step on several large buttons on the ground,

and watch parts of the brain light up: the frontal lobe
for decision and memory, the temporal lobe

for smell and sound, the occipital for sight. I try
to make my toddler son laugh by hopping

from one button to the next, watching each lobe
light up along the way, but he will not leave the prison

of his melancholy. My son: how he loves to revisit
the most difficult point of conflict in a picture book,

or the moment at which his favorite car heaves

arc, or the promise of injury if I take a fall. My son,
so distant from other children in his sadness.

Just the other day, at the pool, he gazed
at the boys and girls splashing and shrieking

and said, Look. The children are having fun,
as if he were an anthropologist in a foreign land.

If these are his musings at age two, one can only
imagine the life that must follow. Through a dark channel

he was born; to darkness he is most drawn. Easier
to write than say the guilt I feel for giving him

the sharp pain of melancholy. My son, always
in the world without husk or shell, it is as if his heart

throbs on the outside of his body, as if his brain
has no skull to absorb the assaults that strike it.

a typical kid, this is what they do, everyone assures 

his sense of emergency. Instead, today, I stand back,

relinquish the role of skull and skin, watch his mind
unfurl like a medieval tapestry. In that moment

of my feigned disinterest, his head is no longer head
but battlefield where Wrath wages a fierce war

against Patience. He is no longer a little boy
screaming on the ground and throwing plastic trucks;

instead he is a creature engaged in a struggle
to free his enslaved heart from the monsters

whose foaming mouths and hot fumes
and clots of foul blood besiege him

as he gathers his thoughts from the unraveling 
of his universe. Prudentius says that fiery Wrath

in her frenzy slays herself and dies
by her own weapons. I will watch and wait

for my son to close his mind from the anger
and sorrow that fester in him, but if the mind

does not close, I hope I can hide the weapons
before, one day, it is too late.

the other day i was thinking about the term pyramid scheme, and why they called it pyramid scheme and not triangle scheme
and i asked you what you thought
unconsciously suggesting a silent wealth of gold and heat
a triangle is two dimensional, and therefore
a less striking mental image than the idea of a third dimension of financial fraud
which is how many dimensions of financial fraud the term pyramid scheme suggests
but i had to pause for a second at the financial fraud part
i knew they had something to do with people getting money from nothing
like
the person at the top of the pyramid scheme, or more accurately
triangle scheme, acquires a number of investors and takes their money
and then pays the first lot of investors with the money from another bunch of investors
and so on and so forth
all the way to the bottom of the triangle
or pyramid face
which is the kind of stupid thing that happens
if you keep your money in a pyramid and not a bank account
although if you ask me banks are the real pyramid schemes after all

and i should shop around and compare the interest rates on different pyramids
maybe i should open up a savings pyramid
with a whole bunch of trapdoors and malarias
to keep the financial anthropologists
i mean bankers out

i think this was supposed to be a metaphor for something
whatever
but knowing me, it was probably love
that cartoon black castle with a single bird flying over it

how far below the sand
and you and I are a little drunk
you answer the phone
you pour me a drink
i know you hate the domestic in poetry but you should have thought of that before you invited me to move in with you
i used to think arguments were the same as honesty
i used to think screaming was the same as passion
i used to think pain was meaningful
i no longer think pain is meaningful
i never learned anything good from being unhappy
i never learned anything good from being happy either
the way i feel about you has nothing to do with learning
it has nothing to do with anything
but i feel it down in the corners of my sarcophagus
i feel it in my sleep
even when i am not thinking about you
you are still pouring through my blood, like fire through an abandoned hospital ward
these coins are getting heavy on my eyes
it has been a great honor and privilege to love you
it has been a great honor and privilege to eat cold pizza on your steps at dawn
and having a million gold coins rain down on you
because sun money is free money
but i would pay tax
because i believe that hospitals and education
and the arts should be publicly funded
even this poem
when i look at you, my eyes are two identical neighborhood houses on fire
when i look at you my eyes bulge out of my skull like a dog in a cartoon
when i am with you
an enormous silence descends upon me
and i feel like i am sinking into the deepest part of my life
we walk down the street, with the grass blowing back and forth
i have never been so happy

Backward, turn backward, O Time, in your flight, 
Make me a child again just for tonight! 
Mother, come back from the echoless shore, 
Take me again to your heart as of yore; 
Kiss from my forehead the furrows of care, 
Smooth the few silver threads out of my hair; 

Backward, flow backward, O tide of the years! 
Take them, and give me my childhood again! 
Weary of flinging my soul-wealth away; 

Tired of the hollow, the base, the untrue, 
Mother, O mother, my heart calls for you! 
Many a summer the grass has grown green, 
Blossomed and faded, our faces between: 
Yet, with strong yearning and passionate pain, 
Long I tonight for your presence again. 

Over my heart, in the days that are flown, 
No love like mother-love ever has shone; 
Faithful, unselfish, and patient like yours: 
None like a mother can charm away pain 
From the sick soul and the world-weary brain. 

Come, let your brown hair, just lighted with gold, 
Fall on your shoulders again as of old; 
Let it drop over my forehead tonight, 
Shading my faint eyes away from the light; 
For with its sunny-edged shadows once more 
Haply will throng the sweet visions of yore; 

Mother, dear mother, the years have been long 
Since I last listened your lullaby song: 
Sing, then, and unto my soul it shall seem 
Clasped to your heart in a loving embrace, 
With your light lashes just sweeping my face, 

A woman moves her hands oddly 
because her grandfather passed through 
a place he never spoke of. Making 
instead the old jokes with angled fingers. 
it will answer. Call pain seawater, tree, it will answer. 
Call what branching happened a man 
whose job it was to break fingers or lose his own. 
Call fingers angled like branches what peel and cut apples, 
to give to a girl who eats them in silence, looking. 
Call her afterward tree, call her seawater angled by silence. 

I
walk. And no more widows, there being neither marriage nor giving
brings to mind lilacs that have budded and blossomed. There are no
more blossoms, perfume and purple gone for a year, as if forever. In
heaven there are no tears, salt water wiped away entirely. One moment
I breathe contentment. And then unreasoning sorrow pulses through
me, an imperfect tension, as if unending. I have time on my hands. In
heaven there is no more dusk, dark, dawn, meridian. And what I know
now and for certain: neither the day nor the hour.
II
It seems clear enough that there is in the brain a particular pain-center,
where sensations of every variety check in, to emerge as anguish and
hurt. Thus there is not, as we might suppose, a multiplicity of pains,
like an arsenal deployed against us, but one pain which puts on, as in a
ritual theater, different masks.
peopling an endless repertory. From one fairy tale to another, is not
the witch the same witch, whether poisoning an apple or fattening the
children?
III
The doctrine changes, blows here and there, hot, cold. One more
notion sweeps across the state in gusts, fiercely at first, settling then
into a mild rotation. It puts things in motion. It dies down, while
pressure somewhere else is building.
moments force themselves apart.
space in your lungs, never emptied, never needing to be filled. The spirit
there, stale and sustaining, holds open every possibility, urging none. Ghost
money: money to burn.
IV
On the earliest known sundial, the finger of shadow moves through
symbols of the cosmos, but there are no lines drawn to mark off the hours.
recurrence, its brightness.
V
Hermaphrodite, sleeping. Predominance, in the visible, of the right hand
already complete? A perfect asymmetrical stability. No need to see or even
to look.
VI
A scream from outside broke our argument and I ran to the door, rushed
out onto the sidewalk almost, I thought, before the scream had ended. The
night sky, above the street lamp, had a sheen of some dark metal.
of a machine hurrying to disaster. And all day, in the violence of delivery,
ordinary trucks rattle our sashes.
which way to turn.

That marsh hawk,
its blown-leaf flight 
across Tomales Bay fog, 
the Pacific tide pressuring
and squeezing wave on wave 
We feel somehow between us
still water crushed by that sea,
so constant it seems not to be.
The hawk, a circus, tumbles,
stops, stands upon the air,
beats its wings as if to shoo 
and its clapping wings stop
our unstoppable argument,
that love goes, who knows why,
and delivers us from pain 
to pain, air with teeth 
Northern harrier, owl face, 
they sea-changed your name,
who listens with your face
and shows not love but want, 
speed, life in flight 
toward, forever toward,
pausing at every chance
to use what ocean-born
bayside air sustains you
by resisting you. We thank
your sunken head bones
and wild close-to-water seeking
that somehow speaks to us,

After the storm, after the rain stopped pounding,
We stood in the doorway watching horses
We stared through the black screen,
Our vision altered by the distance
So I thought I saw a mist
Kicked up around their hooves when they faded
Like cut-out horses
Away from us.
The grass was never more blue in that light, more
Scarlet; beyond the pasture
Trees scraped their voices into the wind, branches
Crisscrossed the sky like barbed wire
But you said they were only branches.

Okay. The storm stopped pounding.
I am trying to say this straight: for once
I was sane enough to pause and breathe
Outside my wild plans and after the hard rain
I turned my back on the old curses. I believed
They swung finally away from me ...

But still the branches are wire
And thunder is the pounding mortar,
Still I close my eyes and see the girl
Running from her village, napalm
Stuck to her dress like jelly,
Her hands reaching for the no one
Who waits in waves of heat before her.

So I can keep on living,
So I can stay here beside you,
I try to imagine she runs down the road and wings
Beat inside her until she rises
Above the stinking jungle and her pain
Eases, and your pain, and mine.

But the lie swings back again.
The lie works only as long as it takes to speak
And the girl runs only as far
As the napalm allows
Until her burning tendons and crackling
Muscles draw her up
into that final position

Burning bodies so perfectly assume. Nothing
Can change that; she is burned behind my eyes
And not your good love and not the rain-swept air
And not the jungle green
Pasture unfolding before us can deny it.

Variable, changeable, yes, there are days when 

blades of grass lightly blowing them all one way. 

And then there are days when we feel April, 
the fields of April making us feel our bodies 

trembling to be touched: and under the influences 
of rains pouring down as if pure spirit poured 

sprouts and branches and entangles us 

in lush bowers and thickets of illusion. 

and bird passing over it, days when even our own pain 

and what we feel it to be like make us smile. 
disgusting, so sordid to ourselves 

off tossed coins of the good, the terrible 

shining with the gleam of that primal metal. 

And other days come, come when women 

touch the roundness of an apple or a pear, 

the round earth spins us off into space. 

And then there arrive days so dismal and stupefied 
and numb that the idiot soughing of a pine grove 

sounds like weeping: and what some idiot called 
the soul whines and wails and carries on 

and maybe not God himself, that absolute fool, 
can make that wind less cutting, or make it stop. 

And then there comes, certain to come, oh my earth 
I love beyond any of my days, a day . . . a day . . . a day 

when my sail catches the wind and drags the anchor 
up out of the bottom muck, and nothing can withstand 

the day when nobody and nothing can keep us 
from getting up and going, no matter who we are . . . 

the day when our leaving is the same as our arriving.

A storm and so a gift. 
A fence is flattened in 
window. A boy winnows 
from the blown-apart 
smaller panes that he sticks 
his ache-less skin flexing 
it cannot make.
the slant of fear on their faces 
from his mouth, he runs 
baseball bat held out 
tongue makes his viscera 

This day, whate'er the Fates decree, 
Shall still be kept with joy by me: 
This day then let us not be told, 
That you are sick, and I grown old; 
Nor think on our approaching ills, 
And talk of spectacles and pills. 
To-morrow will be time enough 
To hear such mortifying stuff. 
Yet, since from reason may be brought 
A better and more pleasing thought, 
Which can, in spite of all decays, 
Support a few remaining days: 
From not the gravest of divines 
Accept for once some serious lines. 

Long schemes of life, as heretofore; 
Yet you, while time is running fast, 
Can look with joy on what is past. 

A mere contrivance of the brain, 
As atheists argue, to entice 
And fit their proselytes for vice; 
(The only comfort they propose, 
To have companions in their woes;) 
Grant this the case; yet sure 'tis hard 
That virtue, styl'd its own reward, 
And by all sages understood 
To be the chief of human good, 
Should, acting, die, nor leave behind 
Some lasting pleasure in the mind; 
Which by remembrance will assuage 
Grief, sickness, poverty, and age; 
And strongly shoot a radiant dart 
To shine through life's declining part. 

Reflecting on a life well spent? 
Your skilful hand employ'd to save 
Despairing wretches from the grave; 
And then supporting with your store 
Those whom you dragg'd from death before? 
So Providence on mortals waits, 
Preserving what it first creates. 
Your gen'rous boldness to defend 
An innocent and absent friend; 
That courage which can make you just 
To merit humbled in the dust; 
The detestation you express 
For vice in all its glitt'ring dress; 
That patience under torturing pain, 
Where stubborn stoics would complain: 
Must these like empty shadows pass, 
Or forms reflected from a glass? 
That fly, and leave no marks behind? 
Does not the body thrive and grow 
By food of twenty years ago? 
And, had it not been still supplied, 
It must a thousand times have died. 
Then who with reason can maintain 
That no effects of food remain? 
And is not virtue in mankind 
The nutriment that feeds the mind; 
Upheld by each good action past, 
And still continued by the last? 
Then, who with reason can pretend 
That all effects of virtue end? 

That true contempt for things below, 
Nor prize your life for other ends, 
Than merely to oblige your friends; 
Your former actions claim their part, 
And join to fortify your heart. 
For Virtue, in her daily race, 
Looks back with joy where she has gone 
And therefore goes with courage on: 
She at your sickly couch will wait, 
And guide you to a better state. 

Take pity on your pitying friends! 
Nor let your ills affect your mind, 
To fancy they can be unkind. 
Me, surely me, you ought to spare, 
Who gladly would your suff'rings share; 
Or give my scrap of life to you, 
And think it far beneath your due; 
You, to whose care so oft I owe 
That I'm alive to tell you so.

1. The Letter

Everywhere the windows give up nothing
Just engines shrilling pocked and frozen streets
an iced fantastic: spiked, the glacial floes

crystal world spinning in her corner shop
when I passed, a globe boundaried with turning
Hello, Plague Angel. I just heard your wings

Massachusetts. Fatigue, pneumonia,
the emptiness when we were young would come

rough ministry peeling my face away.
Light like the cruel light of another century
to their last account and the mourners go about

on her shelf beneath an album of pressed gentian:
before they are eight years old. But one in four lives

blackening the water. This arctic water, this
go hey princess, why you so sad tonight,
up all night & needing a hit to let her sleep.
We know that story, the crest and billow
& foam and fleeting fullness

before the disappearing. Discs of hissing ice,
doors you (I?) might fall through to the underworld
of bars & bus stations, private rooms of
dancing girls numb-sick & cursing the wilderness
Round spoon of powder hissing over the flame.
Worlds within worlds, beneath worlds, worlds that flare
and consume so they become the only world.

What is that general rule which tells
Whatever grows quick decays quick: soon ripe,
my table, those Boston girls 20 years gone,
young men in lace & glitter washed alien

we know the rest. Reckless anthem.
& emblem of a deity indifferent. Her embassy lay
wrought towers scripture promised the saved

delirious. Ignis fatuus. Strike the match,
of it, the whirring rush, blond hiss of aerial
miles, worn stairways in every burning school
talk blurring hallucinatory fraught
avenues. Illusive inner city, drugged
balustrades rococoed, lapidary. Invisible empires
circling the Common with twilight, their caw
& settle, the patterns as they wheel
roseate, violet, deeper, the swanboats

in a New York minute. But the glory
lipsticked pink, casting embers, seraphic fires

Dream time, the inner time
where towers and battlements erect
celebrities among them, the crowds falling back,

you inhabit like the thief you are. Ignis fatuus.
setting out a thousand ruined nights in the splendor
of the torched & reckless hour.
when winter beaks the shattered pane,

you float above? When the place you walk into
When it makes perfect sense to blow someone away
for 20 bucks beyond even your bleak human universe.

must falter where persists
bitter alloy comes away in my hand,
in wind persists riven as the taste of myself,
the blood blooming healthy,
spread stunned before me. These hands.

The dazzling girls, girls, girls in platinum wigs
have been lifted away by some infernal agency,
the queens, exotic Amazons & rough-trade gay boys.

Sometimes I go back to walk the streets all shops
burnt-out shell. So American, this destruction

genesis falls through vast deserted silences,
towers grown otherworldly with light
thrown starlike from some alien world. Gone the Show Bar,
the Mousetrap, the whole gaudy necklace

of lacquer-dark underground lounges, halls
of mirrors, music billowing dancers
clean out of themselves beyond the dead-faced tricks,
the sick voyeurs. The Combat Zone. I can map it

in my mind, some parallel world, the ghost city
beneath the city. Parallel lives, the ones
In all that dangerous cobalt luster

where was safety? Home? When we were delirium
on rooftops, the sudden thrill of wind dervishing
cellophane, the shredded cigarettes. We were
the dust the Haitians spit on to commemorate

the dead, the click & slurried fall of beads
across a doorway. In the torn & watered silk
of night, the Zone exploded its shoddy neon orchid
to swallow us in the scent of fear, emergency,

that oily street perfume & weeping brick.
Gossamer clothes, summertime and leaning
against the long dusty cars, cruising siren songs.

Dancer, and floor, and cadence
quite gathered away, and I a phantom, to you
a phantom, rehearse the story.

Thanksgiving, 1990, & all she wants is sweets
spinning war stories, how bad she is: So, I say,
go ahead and shoot me, put me out of my misery.

On the Gilfillan burial day, 
It was a most solemn sight to see, 
Not fewer than thirty thousand people assembled in Dundee, 
All watching the funeral procession of Gilfillan that day, 
That death had suddenly taken away, 

There were about three thousand people in the procession alone, 
And many were shedding tears, and several did moan, 
And their bosoms heaved with pain, 
Because they knew they would never look upon his like again. 

There could not be fewer than fifty carriages in the procession that day, 
And gentlemen in some of them that had come from far away, 
And in whispers some of them did say, 
As the hearse bore the precious corpse away, 
Along the Nethergate that day. 

For he never turned them empty-handed away from his door; 

There was a body of policemen marshalled in grand array, 
And marched in front of the procession all the way; 
And whose soul I hope to heaven has fled away, 
To sing with saints above for ever and aye. 

The Provost, Magistrates, and Town Council were in the procession that day; 
Also Mrs Gilfillan, who cried and sobbed all the way 
For her kind husband, that was always affable and gay, 
Which she will remember until her dying day. 

When the body of the great Gilfillan was lowered into the grave, 
And with tearful eyes and bated breath, 

Then she dropped a ringlet of immortelles into his grave, 
Then took one last fond look, and in sorrow did leave; 
And all the people left with sad hearts that day, 

The heart and service to you proffer'd
With right good will full honestly,
Refuse it not, since it is offer'd,
But take it to you gentlely.

And though it be a small present,
Yet good, consider graciously
The thought, the mind, and the intent
Of him that loves you faithfully.

It were a thing of small effect
To work my woe thus cruelly,
For my good will to be abject:
Therefore accept it lovingly.

Pain or travel, to run or ride,
I undertake it pleasantly;
Bid ye me go, and straight I glide
At your commandement humbly.

Pain or pleasure, now may you plant
Even which it please you steadfastly;
Do which you list, I shall not want
To be your servant secretly.

And since so much I do desire
To be your own assuredly,
For all my service and my hire
Reward your servant liberally.

He got taken quick. Then he hung around.
And anyway, he never really wanted
Then from out there and for years the prodigal
about jobs, a wife he found, kids they had.
Things he used to hear people talking about.
He never even bothered to make it up.
Or tried to keep his stories straight.
His wife? A harem of hair colors.
Kids fizzed up like bugs, then fizzled out.
Sometimes his head flashed on something fat
and beautiful. He watched it shoot by.
Then he listened for the crash.
Mostly, he was in the dark, drifting.
And, within limits, less of a chump.
He walked away from a lot of stuff.
There were some things he did. This and that.
Lucky, real dirty work never came looking.
Once he dumped a woman. Later she dumped him back.
So that was that.
Well, just say he was down on his luck.
Or starting now to get it together.
Or he was taking things one day at a time.
One more also-ran playing out the string.
Or, staring straight ahead, out of the blue
So, what did they think of him, out there?
Joke. Embarrassment. Eyesore. Take your pick.
But how could it matter what anyone said
in that rasping, hissing, clanging tongue of theirs?
Then every once in a while he sat down and wrote.

everyday things people put in their letters,
and howlers only a mother would believe,
and reassuring fluff about the weather,
as if sun were sun, and his rain, like theirs,
could fill the cistern and make green things grow.
And here they were, grinning back at him,
every pitiful, dumb phrase he wrote,
copied over like a holy scripture
that made his snarled, uncontrollable scrawl
round and plan and easy to read.
Her ABCs were good enough to eat
slowly in the little oven of her hands
and strung into necklaces of script.
But if he read those letters at all,
his eyes scribbled some glare before he fed
the page, balled up, to the dark, muttering
demon of trash chained in the corner,
when, drunk or stoned, he plummeted straight down
above his swollen, already aging face.

And then. And then. And then.
And then no letter came back.
And soon no letter went forward.
Why listen now to people talking?
The demon settled into self-consumption.
And everything was still.
Dust silted over the phantom children
Though old now, he was still a son
without witnesses anywhere to say
if the promise had been kept or not kept.
what he had done with his heritage?
Then let their silence mute the judgment,
hush the accusation against him!
And now this little corner where he sat
need be no worse than any other
little corner of the universe.

And then one day a witness came forward
An old piece of paper.
Wrinkled. Worn.
Smudged with the dregs of big numbers.
And under their blur, in palest blue
was being true to the words it found.
But there, between the words, in the smeared void
he saw his sentence spelled out.
Of his waste life: pain. Of falsity: pain.
It was a lash. A lifeline. His lifeline
With a pencil stub he traced the faint line
of her letters across the yellowed page.
As faithfully as she, as patiently
He, too, was happy. He, too, was glad. He wrote.

Somewhat back from the village street 
Stands the old-fashioned country-seat. 
Across its antique portico 
Tall poplar-trees their shadows throw; 
And from its station in the hall 

Half-way up the stairs it stands, 
And points and beckons with its hands 
From its case of massive oak, 
Like a monk, who, under his cloak, 
Crosses himself, and sighs, alas! 

By day its voice is low and light; 
But in the silent dead of night, 
Distinct as a passing footstep's fall, 
It echoes along the vacant hall, 
Along the ceiling, along the floor, 

Through days of sorrow and of mirth, 
Through days of death and days of birth, 
Through every swift vicissitude 
Of changeful time, unchanged it has stood, 
And as if, like God, it all things saw, 

In that mansion used to be 
Free-hearted Hospitality; 
His great fires up the chimney roared; 
The stranger feasted at his board; 
But, like the skeleton at the feast, 

There groups of merry children played, 
There youths and maidens dreaming strayed; 
O precious hours! O golden prime, 
And affluence of love and time! 
Even as a miser counts his gold, 

From that chamber, clothed in white, 
The bride came forth on her wedding night; 
There, in that silent room below, 
The dead lay in his shroud of snow; 
And in the hush that followed the prayer, 

All are scattered now and fled, 
Some are married, some are dead; 
And when I ask, with throbs of pain, 
"Ah! when shall they all meet again?" 
As in the days long since gone by, 

Never here, forever there, 
Where all parting, pain, and care, 
Forever there, but never here! 
The horologe of Eternity 

From the beginning, the egg cradled in pebbles,
The drive thick with fledglings, to the known last
Riot of the senses, is only a short pass.
Earth to be forked over is more patient,
Bird hungers more, flower dies sooner.

But if not grasped grows quickly, silently.
We are restless, not remembering much.
The pain is slow, original as laughter,
Reaching for all of it, hardly aware,
Beginning again and feeling for its terrain.

We were often told and still we would not listen,
And closing fingers, those accomplices,
Took comfort from a lie. From lap to grass
Whining, motionless on the lowest branch
Above the pine needles, climbing the heather:

We did not listen. It hid there still to find.
Much since was hard to get, later displeased,
Nursing an ordinary complaint or waiting
For a reiterated brilliance,
Growing in ignorance, too near to see.

Now in the suburbs windows are on fire,
Pale globes quiver on their dusty strings
And afternoons disperse with mirth of gnome,
The rigid stabbed flamingo pink in the trees,
Split to the touch and walking by the pool.

Now life jerking in its sustained coda
Constricts its furniture and its events.
The frowning bus disappears down the hill
Or slides before the window with its bored
Passengers staring unashamedly in.

Electric tongue stammers its recitation.
Children run out in the dumb-bell cul-de-sac
To their cold delight, skipping between the turds
Of long-dead dogs, coiled thickly on the stone.

The children learn so quickly. The house stirs.
Swallows leave earlier, apples to be pressed.
Half the sky burns: the other half is dark.
Hair pushing slowly out, generations
Surrounding us with wonder, theirs and ours.

Nothing to give, nothing has been learnt.
The past simply denies the urge for a truce,
Creeping into the egg. When it is time
We can appoint a committee for the feasts,

Locks stick, glass metamorphosed
In leafy caryatids of summer where
Heat packs the panes and fingers tremble in
Tobacco pockets, a tomato sniffed,
Its greenish acid bloom and tiny hairs.

The pain stirs again like a new life
To be unravelled. It had to come to this.
The body is nothing, the body thinks nothing,
The short senses grubbing on their sticks
Feel nothing, the forgotten carioca.

A line moves to the finger end, and curls,
Head fallen in helplessness. The wails
Of children break behind the woven fences,
Those minted faces tar beyond our sight.
The gates shut: a parade of Japanese flags.

And alive on the porch the councillor lowers his pipe,
Comes down from the dunes a bathroom Arab
Firing off caps, or crouched over shells
Gathered in sodden pumps, the soprano waitress
Bringing hot tea across the evening sand.

The nights come in slowly. Behind a half-curtain
The impossible is completed. A single lamp
Weighs down its ornaments in pools of light.
Shadows crawl over the crater, roped

 A pity, how we misspeak and mishear. 

makes a difference to the increasingly cooler 

do we know, amateurs that we are? Loon, shmoon. 
It might have been dying, announcing 

its pain in those trilling pennants. It might 
have been the girl who was lost in these woods last week 

and never found by the volunteer searchers, 
it might have been her ghost 

with an admonishment. The truth is, 

from pleasure, not in our beds, our hearts, the tone 
of a poem on the final exam (a coin-toss). A pity, because 

we know the urgency of some utterance; 
and the intended goodwill of our listening; and 

the marvelous basic mechanics of speech, 

and she added that tired magic about how atoms 
of Julius Caesar and Napoleon and Beethoven did 

their fleet anachronistic dance in every inhalation 
of ours, although at thirteen I preferred to think 

inflating her see-through empresswear 

Shakespeare, Madame Curie populating my oxygen, 
but also the smelly and scabby old man 

when the late-shift ward nurse heard (as she said in her testimony) 

an unfortunate example of my theme . . . although 
exempla abound, misapprehension 

also dancing inside us at the atomic level. 
Someone thought the gate was locked, she always locked 

the gate in the late afternoon when the haze set down 
and the sun for a moment seemed to carmelize the lake top, 

or a scraggle of hair or a single ribbon. I tell you 

of the minutiae of our own lives. When I heard the sounds 
that gurgled from my chest as my wife was leaving 

into the dense, conspiratorial Austin, Texas night,

and that our total errors, if spread out flat, 

inside us, along with the cardiac and the pulmonary,

we call the future. Even now, as you read this, 
someone in that unknowable distance 

is breathing you in. 

It was past twelve on a mid-winter night, 
Darkness; the distant wink of a huge gun. 

No thorny crown, only a woollen cap 
That Lancaster on Lune may stand secure. 

He faced me, reeling in his weariness, 

To this man, to his boned shoulders
Came the descent of pain.
All kinds,
Cruel, blind, dear, horrid, hallowed,
Rained, again, again.

To this small white blind boned face,
Wherever it was,
Descended
The blows of pain, it took as it were blinded,
As it were made for this.

We were there. We uneasy
Did not know if it were.
Knew neither
The reason nor the man nor whether
To share, or to beware.

1. Today

Today, this moment, speechlessly in pain,
He fights the terror of being poured out,
The fall into darkness unquenchably long
So that even as he hurtles he keeps holding

Can stop that surge, already he swirls
To the source of Voices, the many throats inside the one
Throat, each swallowing the unstoppable flood ...

And as if that, all along, were what he'd wanted,
He hears the Voices begin to die down
The way a marsh in spring pulsing and shrilling
Sunup to sundown falls gradually still

When his every last drop has been poured out.

2. Countdown

In your hospital bed, the plastic mask across
Your face siphoning air into your lungs,
You lie helpless as an astronaut
Blasting into space: Eyes oblivious

To ours, your body's fevered presence
Shimmers like the phantom heat that will trail
Up the pipe of the crematory oven:
How distant we will seem after

Such intensity ... We drift in your stare
Like the dust stirred by the cow your parents
Gave you as a boy to teach responsibility.

Already you are space immeasurable
By your slide rule, your graphs that plotted
Payload, liftoff, escape velocity.

3. Prayer

In the house of the dead I pace the halls:
The walls, collapsing, stretch away in desert
Or flatten into horizonless ocean.
I step outside, the door clicking shut

Comforting in its finality ...
Now I see the house as if I looked down
From far off mountains, and saw you crouching in
The sun-scoured yard, eyes keenly focused,

Pupils narrowing to a cat's green slits:
I can't look you in the face, you see only
The openness of sky rising above mountains.

(Only after the world had emptied
You and filled you with its openness
Will I feel the love I pray to feel?)

4. The God

a dream

A warming pulsing flood like blood surging through
Veins, and now the god stirs in my hands
Dull as stone in this gravity-less Nowhere.
Sensation shivering through me, deliberate and sure,

I cradle you, I sponge you clean
As if you were my son, the emptiness you
Drink like heavy black milk erasing
Your wrinkles and gouged lines of pain.

The god bends me to the work, my fingers driven
By the god, blinded by the god's
Neutrality, until I pull apart the threads
In this place the god commands:

Face wholly unwoven, without heart, mind, you
are nothing in my hands but my hands moving.

5. His Stare

Absently there in a moment of pure being
He sits in his chair, eyes locked, staring:
The air's transparence gains solidity
From his looking; while his emaciated features,

The way his flesh sags from sharpening cheekbones,
Make the summer air weigh like marble on the harsh green
Of the trees he is too weak to prune.
And yet the contemplative distance he is sealed in

Projects with ferocious purpose the will of his body
To withdraw into this eerily removed contemplation
Like one who has heard a tuning fork ringing
And enters and becomes each spectral vibration;

So utterly absorbed that love is a distraction; even
The world, its barest colors, bleeding away before that stare.

6. The Current

The numbing current of the Demorol
Sweeps him out to sea where the secret night
He lives in slowly begins to darken,
His daytime routine of watching his blood cycle

Through the tubes of a machine shadowed by blackness
Blinding as an underwater cave. Already
He filters the dark water through gills aligned
To strain that element he more and more resembles:

Like walls of water held in miraculous
Suspension, the moment of his death looms impartially
Above him, my hands holding his tightening
Its grip even as his hand loosens ...

As if my hand could lead him past that undulating
Weight towering above us out of sight.

7. The Rehearsal

I lead you back, your Orpheus, until you
Stand inhaling, on the topmost stair,
But like fumes rising from earth's molten core

The voices of the dead reach out to you,
Your whispering parents, dead for forty years,
Turn, as must you: Your footsteps die,

You dwindle, blur into unfillable
Space echoing like the dark of a cathedral ...
But there is no dark, no stair, no Orpheus

By breath in words you'll never read these
Lines stolen from your death.

When I go into the garden, there she is. 
The specter holds up her arms to show 
that her hands are eaten off. 
She is silent because of the agony. 
There is blood on her face. 
I can see she has done this to herself. 
So she would not feel the other pain. 
And it is true, she does not feel it. 
She does not even see me. 
It is not she anymore, but the pain itself 
that moves her. I look and think 
how to forget. How can I live while she 
stands there? And if I take her life 
what will that make of me? I cannot 
touch her, make her conscious. 
It would hurt her too much. 
I hear the sound all through the air 
that was her eating, but it is on its own now, 
completely separate from her. I think 
I am supposed to look. I am not supposed 
to turn away. I am supposed to see each detail 
and all expression gone. My God, I think, 
if paradise is to be here 
it will have to include her.

We speak of the pain of childbirth, referring, 
of course, to the mother, but what is pain 
to the mother, the one through whose body 
the course unwinds? She understands already 
what kind of world she must return to, 
how it daily hones its many edges 
against human skin, unlike the child whose 
untried limbs inch toward it, pressing now 
so firmly against her he feels for the first time 
the pinch of bone against bone and is seared 
by the friction. Isn't he the one 
on whom the real burden falls, the one 
to whom resilience means nothing yet? His 
tender skin like a small measure of cloth 
unfolding before the blade under which 
he will, for a lifetime, bruise 
and heal: Crush of the long descent, grip 
of the steadying hands, brush of breath 
against cheek, even the constant barrage 
of the microscopic, the tiny plink-plink 
of the dust motes knocking against him 
before custom makes him numb to it. No wonder 
the startled mouth cries out, 
each pore suddenly hungry 
in the withering, nourishing light.

a task that took two head-throbbing hours.
I wonder how two people could consistently hurt each other,
but still feel love so deeply as their bones turned into dust?
Before Frida died, she painted a watermelon still life;
before his death, Diego did too.
I want to believe that those paintings were composed
during parallel moments because of their undying devotion.
If I close my eyes, I can see melon wedges left like
centerpieces except for the slice
one piece of fruit pecked at by a dove
that passed through a window.
and that the chances of me constructing a roll-top desk
are as slim as me building an Adirondack chair that sits plumb,
The knots in my back might not be there
if I had listened to her suggestions,
and I could well have done without two hours of silence
over a few holes in the wall.
But somehow, life has its ways of working things out.
This afternoon, I shut the blinds,
turned off the TV, lights, and phone,
her second one this week despite
the prophylactics and pain killers that we store in the breadbox.
nausea, blindness, and pain that strike
when the cranial vessels dilate,
fill with blood, leak, and make the brain swell.
Earlier, an MRI triggered the reaction as it mapped her head
with electrical current, gradient magnets, and radio waves
hammering her floundering eyes.
For now, we have our room, the bed frame, and the mattress
where she lies as I knead her toes.
the breeze stirring the lemon, lime, and orange trees
that I planted along the back fence.
On certain nights, the moon turns our lawn
into green acrylic where we sip Syrah and mint tea
until all we know is the sound
of our breathing among the whispering leaves.

At six I lived for spells:
how a few Hawaiian words could call
up the rain, could hymn like the sea
in the long swirl of chambers
curling in the nautilus of a shell,
could conjure money from the poor
and give them nothing but mantras,
the strange syllables that healed desire.

I lived for stories about the war
my grandfather told over hana cards,
slapping them down on the mats
with a sharp Japanese kiai.

I lived for songs my grandmother sang
stirring curry into a thick stew,
into grass mats and straw sandals.

I lived for the red volcano dirt
staining my toes, the salt residue
of surf and sea wind in my hair,
the arc of a flat stone skipping
in the hollow trough of a wave.

for my father to drag himself home,
dusted with blasts of sand, powdered
and the strange ash of raw cement,
his deafness made worse by the clang
of pneumatic drills, sore in his bones
from the buckings of a jackhammer.

let me unlace the hightop G.I. boots,
that day in school, write it for him
with hands that felt like gravel roads,
walk to the laundry sink to scrub,
rinse the dirt of his long day
from a face brown and grained as koa wood.

I wanted to take away the pain
in his legs, the swelling in his joints,
give him back his hearing,
clear and rare as crystal chimes,
the fins of glass that wrinkled
and sparked the air with their sound.

I wanted to heal the sores that work
and war had sent to him,
let him play catch in the backyard
with me, tossing a tennis ball
past papaya trees without the shoulders
of pain shrugging back his arms.

I wanted to become a doctor of pure magic,
to string a necklace of sweet words
fragrant as pine needles and plumeria,
fragrant as the bread my mother baked,
place it like a lei of cowrie shells
and chant him a blessing, a sutra.

They turn the water off, so I live without water,
they build walls higher, so I live without treetops,
they paint the windows black, so I live without sunshine,
they lock my cage, so I live without going anywhere,
they take each last tear I have, I live without tears,
they take my heart and rip it open, I live without heart,
they take my life and crush it, so I live without a future,
they say I am beastly and fiendish, so I have no friends,
they stop up each hope, so I have no passage out of hell,
they give me pain, so I live with pain,
they give me hate, so I live with my hate,
they have changed me, and I am not the same man,
they give me no shower, so I live with my smell,
they separate me from my brothers, so I live without brothers,
who understands me when I say this is beautiful?
who understands me when I say I have found other freedoms?

I cannot fly or make something appear in my hand,
I cannot make the heavens open or the earth tremble,
I can live with myself, and I am amazed at myself, my love,
my beauty,
I am taken by my failures, astounded by my fears,
I am stubborn and childish,
in the midst of this wreckage of life they incurred,
I practice being myself,
and I have found parts of myself never dreamed of by me,
they were goaded out from under rocks in my heart
when the walls were built higher,
when the water was turned off and the windows painted black.
I followed these signs
like an old tracker and followed the tracks deep into myself,
followed the blood-spotted path,
deeper into dangerous regions, and found so many parts of myself,
who taught me water is not everything,
and gave me new eyes to see through walls,
and when they spoke, sunlight came out of their mouths,
and I was laughing at me with them,
we laughed like children and made pacts to always be loyal,
who understands me when I say this is beautiful?

CORRECTION: the last line of the first stanza was corrected to read "who understands me when I say I have found other freedoms?", and the first line of the second stanza was corrected to read "I cannot fly or make something appear in my hand," on November 15, 2010.

And then I thought, Can I have more
of this, would it be possible
for every day to be a greater awakening: more light,
more light, your face on the pillow
with the sleep creases rudely
fragmenting it, hair so stiff
from paint and sheet rock it feels
like the dirty short hank
before he hauled me up and forward,
white flanks flecked green
the livingness, the warmth
of all that blood just under the skin
He was smarter than most of the children
I went to school with. He knew
how to stand with just the crescent
of his hoof along a boot toe and press,
incrementally, his whole weight down. The pain
so surprising when it came,
its iron intention sheathed in stealth, the decisive
sudden twisting of his leg until the hoof
to push him off, that hot
insistence with its large horse eye trained

Like us, he knew how to announce through violence
despite our practiced ministrations: too young
not to try to empathize
with this cunning: this thing
that was and was not human we must respect
for itself and not our imagination of it: I loved him because
I could not love him anymore
watching the slim bodies of teenagers
guide their geldings in figure eights around the ring
as if they were one body, one fluid motion
of electric understanding I would never feel
working its way through fingers to the bit: this thing
had a name, a need, a personality; it possessed
an indifference that gave me
logic and a measure: I too might stop wanting
the hand placed on back or shoulder
and never feel the desired response.
I loved the horse for the pain it could imagine

and inflict on me, the sudden jerking
of head away from halter, the tentative nose
inspecting first before it might decide
to relent and eat. I loved
what was not slave or instinct, that when you turn to me
it is a choice, it is always a choice to imagine pleasure
might be blended, one warmth
bleeding into another as the future
bleeds into the past, more light, more light,
your hand against my shoulder, the image
of the one who taught me disobedience
is the first right of being alive.

Memory was the room I entered down a long corridor
Thrown by the white drugs of pain though pain
Was adrift on a glassy stream of green tide
Where images flickered and ran on

In those days but to grab the attention
Of readers nearby who had been crushed by life
Who floated across the exercise yard like headaches

Smoking rag-cigarettes looking sideways
For the next punishment for a break or maybe distraction
Chips of memory kept rising to the surface
Of our minds to take another bite

I had no idea why poetry the squid caught me
It clung to my brain in the damaging climate
A creature in the alien element of air
Arising from centuries of survival

Thoughts must be inky and capable
Of working the bait with a black beak
For a quick kill and a metaphysical rise up through the abyss
Poetry in those days was a handmade lure

There were no fish or birds so I spun my lines
To the ones with heads spring-loaded with resentment
Their temper a red fleck twitching in an eye
While poems of the future waited in line to hear my number

Many in aftertimes will say of you
   Not that I loved you more than just in play,
Even let them prate; who know not what we knew
   Of love and parting in exceeding pain.
   Of parting hopeless here to meet again,
Hopeless on earth, and heaven is out of view.
But by my heart of love laid bare to you.
   My love that you can make not void nor vain,
Love that foregoes you but to claim anew
   Beyond this passage of the gate of death,
I charge you at the Judgment make it plain
   My love of you was life and not a breath.

with Dana Ward
I have so little want of activity
even writing with its pain more terrible than life
not in the way, you, Sarah know I am
nor, you reader, who think of me fishing.
Line, spindle, lure, bait. Instruments for me
are accessories, even the matchbook is only
a tiara to my eyes, the fishing lure a long
& white bracelet. Some of my
so-called friends think of me as a derelict
they always try to hold me to account.
On the witness stand I am a kitten
about stupid, or fish, or last night.
I like to lay at the base of a hill
asleep while the shepherds work
bringing things to heel with tepid will where I source
my contempt in the index of swill.
The entries there make no mention of hell
which was sifted through the vale of tears, & fell
to make Earth, & the base of this hill where I sunbathe & murmur
I 
A baby's feet, like sea-shells pink, 
An angel's lips to kiss, we think, 

Like rose-hued sea-flowers toward the heat 
Their ten soft buds that part and meet. 

No flower-bells that expand and shrink 
As shine on life's untrodden brink 

II 
A baby's hands, like rosebuds furled 
Ope if you touch, though close upcurled, 

Then, fast as warriors grip their brands 
They close, clenched hard like tightening bands. 

No rosebuds yet by dawn impearled 

III 
A baby's eyes, ere speech begin, 
Bless all things bright enough to win 

Love, while the sweet thing laughs and lies, 
Sees perfect in them Paradise. 

Their glance might cast out pain and sin, 
By mute glad godhead felt within 

What lips my lips have kissed, and where, and why, 
I have forgotten, and what arms have lain 
Under my head till morning; but the rain 
Is full of ghosts tonight, that tap and sigh 
Upon the glass and listen for reply, 
And in my heart there stirs a quiet pain 
For unremembered lads that not again 
Will turn to me at midnight with a cry. 

Thus in the winter stands the lonely tree, 
Nor knows what birds have vanished one by one, 
Yet knows its boughs more silent than before: 
I cannot say what loves have come and gone, 
I only know that summer sang in me 
A little while, that in me sings no more.

Ominous inscrutable Chinese news 
to get just before Christmas, 
considering my reasonable health, 
marriage spicy as moo-goo-gai-pan, 
career running like a not-too-old Chevrolet. 
Not bad, considering what can go wrong: 
the bony finger of Uncle Sam 
might point out my husband, 
my own national guard, 
and set him in Afghanistan; 
my boss could take a personal interest; 
the pain in my left knee could spread to my right. 
Still, as the old year tips into the new, 
I insist on the infant hope, gooing and kicking 
his legs in the air. I won't give in 
to the dark, the sub-zero weather, the fog, 
or even the neighbors' Nativity. 
Their four-year-old has arranged 
his whole legion of dinosaurs 
so they, too, worship the child, 
joining the cow and sheep. Or else, 
ultimate mortals, they've come to eat 
ox and camel, Mary and Joseph, 
then savor the newborn babe.

Alas, so all things now do hold their peace!
The beasts, the air, the birds their song do cease,
Calm is the sea; the waves work less and less:
Bringing before my face the great increase
In joy and woe, as in a doubtful case.
But by and by, the cause of my disease
When that I think what grief it is again

That I would even use the phrase suggests
A false yet useful worldliness, a scope
Far greater than my caste would indicate.
In fact I hate the game; its ethos rests
On boring strategies and rules that cope,
How luck and skill dovetail in every botched
Clear kick on goal, and every header rubs
Against the grain of what is beautiful
In sport, at least to my Yankee Doodle eyes.
Give me smashmouth football over soccer.
Give me concussions, shattered bones, ripped muscles,
Strategies of season-long attrition.
Give me huge men heaving their bountiful
Frames against each other with such grace that size
Seems incidental to the role of stalker
Of fleet backs and fleeter ends, men who bustle
Along the line of scrimmage on a mission.
A hundred and sixty-pound defensive end,
I was the scourge of JV quarterbacks.
I blitzed on every down, so spent the game
With most the action at my back; the coach
And vodka, said my job was to defend
Right flank from sweeps and register some sacks.
Helter skelter, I dreamed of gridiron fame.
Much less than mediocre, I could not broach
The fact of pain, the realm where bruises flower.

A hears by chance a familiar name, and the name involves a riddle of the past.
B, in love with A, receives an unsigned letter in which the writer states that she is the mistress of A and begs B not to take him away from her.
B, compelled by circumstances to be a companion of A in an isolated place, alters her rosy views of love and marriage when she discovers, through A, the selfishness of men.
A, an intruder in a strange house, is discovered; he flees through the nearest door into a windowless closet and is trapped by a spring lock.
A is so content with what he has that any impulse toward enterprise is throttled.
A solves an important mystery when falling plaster reveals the place where some old love letters are concealed.
A, a crook, seeks unlawful gain by selling A-8 an object, X, which A-8 already owns.
A sees a stranger, A-5, stealthily remove papers, X, from the pocket
of another stranger, A-8, who is asleep. A follows A-5.
A sends an infernal machine, X, to his enemy, A-3, and it falls into
Philip, ignorant of her request, has the money placed in an escrow account.
A discovers that his pal, W, is a girl masquerading as a boy.
A, discovering that W is a girl masquerading as a boy, keeps the knowledge to himself and does his utmost to save the masquerader from annoying experiences.
A, giving ten years of his life to a miserly uncle, U, in exchange for a college education, loses his ambition and enterprise.

A, undergoing a strange experience among a people weirdly deluded, discovers the secret of the delusion from Herschel, one of the victims who has died. By means of information obtained from the notebook, A succeeds in rescuing the other victims of the delusion.
A dies of psychic shock.

Silver coins from the Mojave Desert turn up in the possession of a sinister jeweler.
Ardis, caught in a trap and held powerless under a huge burning glass, is saved by an eclipse of the sun.
A and A-2 meet with a tragic adventure, and A-2 is killed.
Elvira, seeking to unravel the mystery of a strange house in the hills, is caught in an electrical storm. During the storm the house vanishes and the site on which it stood becomes a lake.
Alphonse has a wound, a terrible psychic wound, an invisible psychic wound, which causes pain in flesh and tissue which, otherwise, are perfectly healthy and normal.
Jenny, homeward bound, drives and drives, and is still driving, no nearer to her home than she was when she first started.
Buster has left everything to Lydia, a beautiful Siamese girl poet of whom no one has heard.
Lassie and Rex tussle together politely; Lassie, wounded, is forced to limp home.
In the Mexican gold rush a city planner is found imprisoned by outlaws in a crude cage of sticks.
More people flow over the dam and more is learned about the missing electric cactus.
Too many passengers have piled onto a cable car in San Francisco; the conductor is obliged to push some of them off.
Maddalena, because of certain revelations she has received, firmly resolves that she will not carry out an enterprise that had formerly been dear to her heart.

Fog enters into the shaft of a coal mine in Wales.
A violent wind blows the fog around.
Two miners, Shawn and Hillary, are pursued by fumes.
Jarvis, because of a disturbing experience, is compelled to turn against his friend, Emily.
Jarvis loses his small fortune in trying to help a friend.
Ambrosius, suffering misfortune, seeks happiness in the companionship of Joe, and in playing golf.
Cathy, walking in the street, sees Arthur, a stranger, weeping.
Cathy abandons Arthur after he loses his money and is injured and sent to a hospital.
Arthur, married to Beatrice, is haunted by memories of a former sweetheart, Cornelia, a heartless coquette whom Alvin loves.

Sauntering in a park on a fine day in spring, Tricia and Plotinus encounter a little girl grabbing a rabbit by its ears. As they remonstrate with her, the girl is transformed into a mature woman who regrets her feverish act.
Running up to the girl, Alvin stumbles and loses his coins.
Beatrice loved Alvin before he married.
Ambrose marries Phyllis, a nice girl from another town.
Pellegrino, a rough frontiersman in a rough frontier camp, undertakes to care for an orphan.
Ildebrando constructs a concealed trap, and a person near to him, Gwen, falls into the trap and cannot escape.

It begins simply with a fist, white-knuckled
and tight, glossy with sweat. With two eyes
in a rearview mirror watching for a convoy.
The radio a soundtrack that adrenaline has
pushed into silence, replacing it with a heartbeat,
his thumb trembling over the button.
as he lights a Miami, draws in the smoke
and waits in his taxi at the traffic circle.
He thinks of summer 1974, lifting
pitchforks of grain high in the air,
and although it was decades ago, he still loves her,
remembers her standing at the canebrake
where the buffalo cooled shoulder-deep in the water,
pleased with the orange cups of flowers he brought her,
and he regrets how so much can go wrong in a life,
how easily the years slip by, light as grain, bright
traveling at the speed of sound to open him up
in blood and shock, a man whose last thoughts
are of love and wreckage, with no one there
to whisper him gone.
Sgt. Ledouix of the National Guard
speaks but cannot hear the words coming out,
because it lends the world a certain calm,
though the traffic circle is filled with people
running in panic, their legs a blur
like horses in a carousel, turning
and turning the way the tires spin
on the Humvee flipped to its side,
a mystery to him now, a dark hole
in metal the color of sand, and if he could,
he would crawl back inside of it,
and though his fingertips scratch at the asphalt
shrapnel has torn into his ribcage
and he will bleed to death in ten minutes,
but he finds himself surrounded by a strange
beauty, the shine of light on the broken,
the way his wife might, amazed to find
a wedding ring on his crushed hand,
the bright gold sinking in flesh
going to bone.
Rasheed passes the bridal shop
on a bicycle, with Sefa beside him,
and just before the air ruckles and breaks
he glimpses the sidewalk reflections
in the storefront glass, men and women
walking and talking, or not, an instant
of clarity, just before each of them shatters
as if even the idea of them were being
destroyed, stripped of form,
the blast tearing into the manikins
who stood as though husband and wife
a moment before, who cannot touch
one another, who cannot kiss,
who now lie together in glass and debris,
holding one another in their half-armed embrace,
calling this love, if this is all there will ever be.
The civil affairs officer, Lt. Jackson, stares
at his missing hands, which make
no sense to him, no sense at all, to wave
these absurd stumps held in the air
out the Humvee window, his left hand holding the bottle,
his right hand dipping the plastic ring in soap,
filling the air behind them with floating spheres
like the oxygen trails of deep ocean divers,
something for the children, something beautiful,
translucent globes with their iridescent skins
drifting on vehicle exhaust and the breeze
that might lift one day over the Zagros mountains,
that kind of hope, small globes which may have
astonished someone on the sidewalk
seven minutes before Lt. Jackson blacks out
from blood loss and shock, with no one there to bandage
the wounds that would carry him home.
Nearby, an old woman cradles her grandson,
whispering, rocking him on her knees
as though singing him to sleep, her hands
wet with their blood, her black dress
soaked in it as her legs give out
and she buckles with him to the ground.
if she could see herself an old woman
begging by the roadside for money, here,
with a bomb exploding at the market
To have your heart broken one last time
before dying, to kiss a child given sight
And the man who triggered the button,
he is everywhere, he is of all things,
his touch is the air taken in, the blast
and wave, the electricity of shock,
his is the sound the heart makes quick
searching for light and color, that sound
the martyr cries filled with the word
his soul is made of, Inshallah.
Still hanging in the air over Ashur Square,
the telephone line snapped in two, crackling
a strange incantation the dead hear
as they wander confused amongst one another,
the living in their grief, to console
those who cannot accept such random pain,
speaking habib softly, one to another there
in the rubble and debris, habib
over and over, that it might not be forgotten.

sleepwalker can never die
he is the chemical soldier
composite of latex 
and atropine,
hellfire, warthogs, 
desolation, pride, 
apaches, lasers,
dust

devils swirling, 
screaming fire 
deaths, machine 
worship, young blond
pilots flashing thumbs
up, excited smiles 
of interviewed
military wives, shrapnel-

paced rockeye 
anti-personnel 
bombs spraying 
death like fireflies 
over a texas barbecue
of human flesh 
stretching sixty miles
across open desert,

armageddon
over eden, algebraic 
mosaic
of witchcraft, dot
pattern magic of omens 
and signs,
victims never
knowing what

hit them, vivid
delivery of hell
to nineveh,
incendiary
reduction of tissue
to shadows on the sand, 
incineration of boots 
with human feet still

in them, pain, 
mania,
technology,
history, delirious 
victims bleeding, 
eagle with the brains
of a weak and

frightened victim in 
its beak, unhappy 
fate, grief,
shame, helpless
rage

The shift of sleepwalks and suicides. 
The occasion of owls and a demi-lune fog. 
Even God has nodded off 

And won't be taking prayers til ten. 
Ad interim, you put them on.  
As if your wants could keep you warm. 

As if. You say your shibboleths. 
You thumb your beads. You scry the glass. 
Night creeps to its precipice 

And the broken rim of reason breaks 
Again. An obsidian sky betrays you. 
Every serrate shadow flays you. 

Soon enough, the crow will caw. 
(He isn't coming back, you know.) 

And so wee, wet hours of grief relent.  
In thirty years you might forget 
Precisely how tonight's pain felt. 

And in whose black house you dwelt.

and we are other than how we see ourselves in our ravings.

and invisible guests come in and out at will.

that good spirits, not evil ones, choose us for their instrument.

Berkeley, 1968

This unfinished business of my
childhood
this emerald lake
side
haunts hierarchies of heavens

 
a palm forest
fell overnight
to make room for an unwanted
garden
ever since
fevers and swellings
turn me into a river

the streets were steep winds were running ahead of ships . . . 
the streets were steep
winds were running ahead
of ships . . .

There was indeed the death of birds
the moon had passed away.

* 
*

 
The morning after his death
pursuing him beyond his bitter end
his mother came to
his grave:
she removed his bones out of 
their pattern
women came at night
and claimed Rimbaud their own

that night there was much

* 
*

Laurels and lilacs bloom around my head because I stood up to the sun 
Laurels and lilacs
bloom around my head
because I stood up to the sun

between flowered banks
I repeat my journeys to seek the
happiness that overcame
your absence
I was happy not to love you anymore
until the sunset reached
the East
and broke my raft apart
there were other rivers underground
covered with dead flowers
it was cold it was cold yes it was
cold.

* 
*

Under a combination of pain
and machine-gun fire
flowers disappeared
they are in the same
state of non-being

We the dead have conversation in our gardens about our lack of existence. 
We the dead have conversation
in our gardens
about our lack of
existence.

* 
*

The gardener is planting blue and white flowers some angel moved in with me to flee the cold temperature on earth are rising but we wear upon us some immovable frost everyone carries his dying as a growing shadow. 
The gardener is planting
blue and white
flowers
some angel moved in with me
to flee the cold
temperature on earth are
rising
but we wear upon us some
immovable frost
everyone carries his dying as
a growing shadow.

* 
*

I left the morning paper
by the coffee cup
the heat was 85 like the
and I went to the window to find
that flowers had bloomed overnight
to replace the bodies
felled in the war

the enemy had come with fire
and ruse
to stamp the names of the dead
in the gardens of Yohmor
It is not because spring
is too beautiful
happens in the dark.

* 
*

A butterfly came to die between two stones at the foot of the Mountain the mountain shed shadows over it to cover the secret of death.* 
A butterfly came to die
between two stones
at the foot of the Mountain
the mountain shed shadows
over it
to cover the secret of
death.

* 
*
And the man said, what has the dead man left
if not to be philosophical,
to solve the deep meaning of it all.

The man peeked in himself and knew
in this life there is no riddle.

the dead man manages his miserable dead existence.
And as will happen to a man asleep with his mouth open who dreams a dream
so a friendly wise guy stops all of a sudden overhead and drops his pants to take a leak 
in his mouth for a lark
and the sleeping man leaps up in pained surprise
and shakes his head and spits and wipes the ordure from his mouth
and for a moment the human world is lit before him with a burning glow that nauseates
thus the mud is stuffed and the water drawn to fill
the hollow in the open mouth of the dead man
and the dead man does not jump and does not spit and does not protest,
and only the pained surprise on his face does not fade.

And the dead man got sick with sorrow and his flesh wasted away
and his pale lips ate back from the rim of his mouth, and his teeth bared a foolish grin
and for all he tried to shut his grin, that smile of the embarrassed dead, apologetic,
to swathe his face in a severe frown of wrath as befits one in pain,
the more his teeth unveiled, and the grin broadened, and stretched from ear to ear
and became the twisted crude laugh of a good for nothing.

All the dead lie flat, laughing crudely toward heaven
as if they saw over them hope wink
like a troupe of ugly women chortling at a disco

And the dead man takes to heart the fact that he will not soon rise from this hole
so he says, how shall a man spend his death, what remains
if not to ponder, study, and resolve the riddle of his days.

and his brain is not flooded with the poisoned blood of lust
and he bears a certain resemblance to a poet sitting at the foot of a mountain,
staring at the sky revealed between the tops of the trees
till suddenly the mountain falls on him and buries him beneath

Then the dead man lights the dim lantern of his memory, that tends to gutter
to rummage after the secret of his life, its joy, sorrow and meaning.
But as the man gnaws through his soul, his soul is full of magazines,
in all the basement of his soul roll only tatters of magazines
and piles and piles of newspapers fill even the hidden chambers of his heart that are unknown.

his daily bread at noon while life he lived,
and oh the little typeface sweet and crisp, melting in your mouth!
And at noon he grasped the evening paper,
and his hand brushed it even at nighttime,
and even the next day he fondled it a bit,
so newspapers filled him till there was not room for anything else.

Even at noon on the day of his death, while still he lived in sweat,
the man read as he sat to his repast, lots of news items
about what was happening in Iran 
and the family of the Shah of Iran
and about the American reaction
and about the strange dealings between
the ministers of Trade and Treasury in our fair land.
These were the last things his soul pondered
the man who lived at noon on the day of his death.
got to where he got to,
and in this confusion over the Shah of Iran
death jumped on him suddenly in all its rage.

(he and his wife and his three children had applied there for asylum)
and the minister of Trade and Treasury and noted matchmaker Venus Katz,
and many more Presidents and ministers and generals and members of parliament
and pimps and car thieves and television presenters and football players,
they and their wives and their kids in a great milling multitude
with all the ordure accompanying them from the depths of the newspapers,
and eating and moving their bowels and making a mess, they spit and suppurate
smeared with the vapor of these people and their sweat,
that rises in a stink from the prattle of their mouths and breath of their noses,
and from their armpits and holes in their loins and goop between their toenails
with the spat out shells and crumbs and empty sweet wrappers of men 

and that his soul was shaped like an army crapper
and so many torn ends of evening newspaper
roll there and every tear of newspaper 
contains a tail end of crumpled news or squished story
and is wiped in the middle with a good wipe and rolls on the earth to where it will.

The Shah of Iran laughed, and his children laughed in turn
and the minister of Trade and Treasury laughed (one by one),
and around them a multitude laughs and cheers and celebrates.

And the dead man cried a desperate cry for his base life that was lost,
for it was choked in the hollow of his mouth that was stuffed with earth.

And not a sound was heard at the graveside, and there was silence
except for a little simmering, a whispering hiss,
like the sound of a silent fart, 
like the sound of a flute that plays so quiet,
and makes such a sad romantic noise.

And the dead man was shown as an empty vessel
and the riddle of his base life
was a foot pad for the soles of the shoes
of the relations of the Shah of Iran.

And his lips lap with an obsequious grin
the exchange rate of the dollar and price of kerosene.

tired and sharp-worded, she hides
her bad brown tooth behind a wicked
smile, and flicks her ass
out of habit, to fend off the pass
that passes for affection.
She keeps her mind the way men
down to her size. She has a thin spine,
swallows her eggs cold, and tells lies.
She slaps a wet rag at the truck drivers
if they should complain. She understands
the necessity for pain, turns away
the smaller tips, out of pride, and
keeps a flask under the counter. Once,
she shot a lover who misused her child.
Before she got out of jail, the courts had pounced
and given the child away. Like some isolated lake,
her flat blue eyes take care of their own stark
bottoms. Her hands are nervous, curled, ready
to scrape.
The common woman is as common
as a rattlesnake.

Can life be a blessing,
Or worth the possessing,
Can life be a blessing if love were away?
Ah no! though our love all night keep us waking,
And though he torment us with cares all the day,
Yet he sweetens, he sweetens our pains in the taking,
There's an hour at the last, there's an hour to repay.

In ev'ry possessing,
The ravishing blessing,
In ev'ry possessing the fruit of our pain,
Poor lovers forget long ages of anguish,
Whate'er they have suffer'd and done to obtain;
'Tis a pleasure, a pleasure to sigh and to languish,
When we hope, when we hope to be happy again.

on the other side
waiting 
for alarms 
in a desert 
of sleepless 
evaporations?

beside yourself 
in the aisles
that distance
makes shorter

than light waves 
in the daylight
that pounds
a lead slab
in the soup
that the winter
dissolves?

the signal
that another plane
carves into wings
in rounded contusions
of a late afternoon
storm,
full of sparks
that the night hurries out
on Locust and serial
cheeks 
shrouded
in shiny costumes?

a circle
like juntas
that the winter makes clear
on the shaved orbiting molecule
that the ear revolves
around,
in a retreat
of explosive 
fossils?

memorizing
the connections
between the hand
and the foot
and the torso
in reverse
of the automatic?

materializing
the unknown
without weather
to increase
the planet
otherwise?

pocketing
the insurance claims
that parkas
and snow equips
with sutures
and hand grenades?

increasing
the tackle box
full of piers
to widen the sea
and shorten 
circuits
full of trees?

feeding the unworn
through a parallel
shapelessness
in desert blooms
on the roots
of a tarp
milking masks?

remodeling
the world
as a breathing
action doll?

calm for knots 
like the guardian hell
that a sewer makes
for angels
in their last testimony
skewered 
like the pony 
was?

freezing in the open
course that half
of everything
enumerates
like clouds?

unwound in a fear
that a jacket
stores
for feed, in easy
shows
and rented
faces on the pain
of entry?

good
like ovens?

My prime of youth is but a frost of cares, 
My feast of joy is but a dish of pain, 
My crop of corn is but a field of tares, 
And all my good is but vain hope of gain. 
The day is gone and yet I saw no sun, 
And now I live, and now my life is done. 

The spring is past, and yet it hath not sprung, 
The fruit is dead, and yet the leaves are green, 
My youth is gone, and yet I am but young, 
I saw the world, and yet I was not seen, 
My thread is cut, and yet it was not spun, 
And now I live, and now my life is done. 

I sought my death and found it in my womb, 
I lookt for life and saw it was a shade, 
I trode the earth and knew it was my tomb, 
And now I die, and now I am but made. 
The glass is full, and now the glass is run, 
And now I live, and now my life is done.

Brave comrade, answer! When you joined the war,
 You loved your home, your kindred, children, wife;
 That which made Abraham bare the priestly knife,

The happy ones are almost always also vulgar; 
happiness has a way of thinking 
that's rushed and has no time to look 
but keeps on moving, compact and manic, 
with contempt in passing for the dying: 
Get on with your life, come on, buck up! 

Those stilled by pain don't mix 
with the cheerful, self-assured runners 
but with those who walk at the same slow pace. 
If one wheel locks and the other's turning 
the turning one doesn't stop turning 
but goes as far as it can, dragging the other 
in a poor, skewed race until the cart 
either comes to a halt or falls apart.

Corinna, pride of Drury-Lane 
For whom no shepherd sighs in vain; 
Never did Covent Garden boast 
So bright a battered, strolling toast; 
No drunken rake to pick her up, 
No cellar where on tick to sup; 
Returning at the midnight hour; 
Then, seated on a three-legged chair, 
Takes off her artificial hair: 
Now, picking out a crystal eye, 
She wipes it clean, and lays it by. 
Stuck on with art on either side, 
Now dexterously her plumpers draws, 
That serve to fill her hollow jaws. 
Untwists a wire; and from her gums 
A set of teeth completely comes. 
Pulls out the rags contrived to prop 
Her flabby dugs and down they drop. 
Proceeding on, the lovely goddess 
Unlaces next her steel-ribbed bodice; 
Press down the lumps, the hollows fill, 
Up goes her hand, and off she slips 
The bolsters that supply her hips. 
With gentlest touch, she next explores 
Her shankers, issues, running sores, 
Effects of many a sad disaster; 
And then to each applies a plaister. 
But must, before she goes to bed, 
Rub off the dawbs of white and red; 
And smooth the furrows in her front 
She takes a bolus ere she sleeps; 
And then between two blankets creeps. 
With pains of love tormented lies; 
Or if she chance to close her eyes, 
Of Bridewell and the Compter dreams, 
And feels the lash, and faintly screams; 
Or, by a faithless bully drawn, 
At some hedge-tavern lies in pawn; 
Or to Jamaica seems transported, 
Alone, and by no planter courted; 
Surrounded with a hundred stinks, 
Belated, seems on watch to lie, 
And snap some cully passing by; 
Or, struck with fear, her fancy runs 
On watchmen, constables and duns, 
From whom she meets with frequent rubs; 
But, never from religious clubs; 
Whose favor she is sure to find, 
Behold the ruins of the night! 
A wicked rat her plaster stole, 
Half eat, and dragged it to his hole. 
The crystal eye, alas, was missed; 
A pigeon picked her issue-peas; 
And Shock her tresses filled with fleas. 
But how shall I describe her arts 
To recollect the scattered parts? 
Or shew the anguish, toil, and pain, 
The bashful muse will never bear 
In such a scene to interfere. 
Corinna in the morning dizened, 

Certain labels are impervious
to solvents, impermeable
as drawn bridges.
Adherents are bound
to bridge and tunnel
around

Tall buildings tip on casters
or are counter-
weighted
also by the lurid light of subways.
Dust gathers on the wainscoting.
She runs a hand around a column
marbled
with the spectral pain
of amputees
Containing decomposure
in dividing cells, abiding
effacement
the door plaques and pediments
engraved with dispelled words.
Concentric desire outspreads
her strained connectives:
dazed and diffused,
flecked like fake marble.

to seeing oneself in surfaces
in a window, a shadow, a standard,
or the immediate space around another body.
She rubs against the space between them,
like that of repellant magnets.
And he does his part in words
with the sound of empty
soda bottles.

As a child on the stop,
she traced her tarsals,
sucked the bend of her elbow.
know them better.
This ease-based knowledge replaced
by a longing spiral on a spinning disk
pushing outward from an empty center.

There was a graven image of Desire 
And by him Pain, whose body shone like fire, 
And Pleasure with gaunt hands that grasped their hire. 
Walking with feet unshod that pashed the mire. 
The senses and the sorrows and the sins, 
Till lips and teeth bite in their sharp indenture, 
Followed like beasts with flap of wings and fins. 
Upon whose lock was written Peradventure.

Forth from Calais, at dawn of night, when sunset summer on autumn shone, 
Fared the steamer alert and loud through seas whence only the sun was gone: 
Soft and sweet as the sky they smiled, and bade man welcome: a dim sweet hour 
Gleamed and whispered in wind and sea, and heaven was fair as a field in flower, 
Stars fulfilled the desire of the darkling world as with music: the star-bright air 
Made the face of the sea, if aught may make the face of the sea, more fair. 
Whence came change? Was the sweet night weary of rest? What anguish awoke in the dark? 
Sudden, sublime, the strong storm spake: we heard the thunders as hounds that bark. 
Lovelier if aught may be lovelier than stars, we saw the lightnings exalt the sky, 
Living and lustrous and rapturous as love that is born but to quicken and lighten and die. 
Heaven's own heart at its highest of delight found utterance in music and semblance in fire: 
Thunder on thunder exulted, rejoicing to live and to satiate the night's desire. 

And the night was alive and anhungered of life as a tiger from toils cast free: 
And a rapture of rage made joyous the spirit and strength of the soul of the sea. 
All the weight of the wind bore down on it, freighted with death for fraught: 
And the keen waves kindled and quickened as things transfigured or things distraught. 
And madness fell on them laughing and leaping; and madness came on the wind: 
And the might and the light and the darkness of storm were as storm in the heart of Ind. 
Such glory, such terror, such passion, as lighten and harrow the far fierce East, 
Rang, shone, spake, shuddered around us: the night was an altar with death for priest. 
The channel that sunders England from shores where never was man born free 
Was clothed with the likeness and thrilled with the strength and the wrath of a tropic sea. 
As a wild steed ramps in rebellion, and rears till it swerves from a backward fall, 
The strong ship struggled and reared, and her deck was upright as a sheer cliff's wall. 
Stern and prow plunged under, alternate: a glimpse, a recoil, a breath, 
And she sprang as the life in a god made man would spring at the throat of death. 
Three glad hours, and it seemed not an hour of supreme and supernal joy, 
Filled full with delight that revives in remembrance a sea-bird's heart in a boy. 
For the central crest of the night was cloud that thundered and flamed, sublime 
As the splendour and song of the soul everlasting that quickens the pulse of time. 
The glory beholden of man in a vision, the music of light overheard, 
The rapture and radiance of battle, the life that abides in the fire of a word, 
In the midmost heaven enkindled, was manifest far on the face of the sea, 
And the rage in the roar of the voice of the waters was heard but when heaven breathed free. 
Far eastward, clear of the covering of cloud, the sky laughed out into light 
From the rims of the storm to the sea's dark edge with flames that were flowerlike and white. 
The leaping and luminous blossoms of live sheet lightning that laugh as they fade 
From the cloud's black base to the black wave's brim rejoiced in the light they made. 
Far westward, throned in a silent sky, where life was in lustrous tune, 
Shone, sweeter and surer than morning or evening, the steadfast smile of the moon. 
The limitless heaven that enshrined them was lovelier than dreams may behold, and deep 
As life or as death, revealed and transfigured, may shine on the soul through sleep. 
All glories of toil and of triumph and passion and pride that it yearns to know 
Bore witness there to the soul of its likeness and kinship, above and below. 
The joys of the lightnings, the songs of the thunders, the strong sea's labour and rage, 
Were tokens and signs of the war that is life and is joy for the soul to wage. 
No thought strikes deeper or higher than the heights and the depths that the night made bare, 
Air stilled and thrilled by the tempest that thundered between its reign and the sea's, 
Rebellious, rapturous, and transient as faith or as terror that bows men's knees. 
No love sees loftier and fairer the form of its godlike vision in dreams 
One utterly, mingled and mastering and mastered and laughing with love that subsides 
As the glad mad night sank panting and satiate with storm, and released the tides. 
In the dense mid channel the steam-souled ship hung hovering, assailed and withheld 
As a soul born royal, if life or if death be against it, is thwarted and quelled. 
As the glories of myriads of glowworms in lustrous grass on a boundless lawn 
Were the glories of flames phosphoric that made of the water a light like dawn. 
A thousand Phosphors, a thousand Hespers, awoke in the churning sea, 
And the swift soft hiss of them living and dying was clear as a tune could be; 
As a tune that is played by the fingers of death on the keys of life or of sleep, 
Audible alway alive in the storm, too fleet for a dream to keep: 
Too fleet, too sweet for a dream to recover and thought to remember awake: 
Light subtler and swifter than lightning, that whispers and laughs in the live storm's wake, 
In the wild bright wake of the storm, in the dense loud heart of the labouring hour, 
A harvest of stars by the storm's hand reaped, each fair as a star-shaped flower. 
And sudden and soft as the passing of sleep is the passing of tempest seemed 
When the light and the sound of it sank, and the glory was gone as a dream half dreamed. 
The glory, the terror, the passion that made of the midnight a miracle, died, 
Not slain at a stroke, nor in gradual reluctance abated of power and of pride; 
With strong swift subsidence, awful as power that is wearied of power upon earth, 
As a God that were wearied of power upon heaven, and were fain of a new God's birth, 
The might of the night subsided: the tyranny kindled in darkness fell: 
And the sea and the sky put off them the rapture and radiance of heaven and of hell. 
The waters, heaving and hungering at heart, made way, and were wellnigh fain, 
For the ship that had fought them, and wrestled, and revelled in labour, to cease from her pain. 
And an end was made of it: only remembrance endures of the glad loud strife; 
And the sense that a rapture so royal may come not again in the passage of life. 

I 

My Soul. I summon to the winding ancient stair; 

My Self. The consecrated blade upon my knees 

My Soul. Why should the imagination of a man 

My Self. Montashigi, third of his family, fashioned it 

My Soul. Such fullness in that quarter overflows 

II 
 
My Self. A living man is blind and drinks his drop. 
What matter if the ditches are impure? 
What matter if I live it all once more? 
Endure that toil of growing up; 
The ignominy of boyhood; the distress 
Of boyhood changing into man; 
The unfinished man and his pain 
Brought face to face with his own clumsiness; 

How in the name of Heaven can he escape 
That defiling and disfigured shape 
The mirror of malicious eyes 
Casts upon his eyes until at last 
He thinks that shape must be his shape? 
And what's the good of an escape 
If honour find him in the wintry blast? 

I am content to live it all again 
And yet again, if it be life to pitch 
Into the frog-spawn of a blind man's ditch, 
A blind man battering blind men; 
Or into that most fecund ditch of all, 
The folly that man does 
Or must suffer, if he woos 
A proud woman not kindred of his soul. 

I am content to follow to its source 
Every event in action or in thought; 
Measure the lot; forgive myself the lot! 
When such as I cast out remorse 
So great a sweetness flows into the breast 
We must laugh and we must sing, 
We are blest by everything, 
Everything we look upon is blest.

Peruvian mines, worked out and abandoned
To a slow clock of condensation,
An echo trapped for ever, and a flutter
Of wildflowers in the lift-shaft,
Indian compounds where the wind dances
And a door bangs with diminished confidence,
Lime crevices behind rippling rain barrels,
Dog corners for bone burials;
And in a disused shed in Co. Wexford,
Deep in the grounds of a burnt-out hotel,
Among the bathtubs and the washbasins
A thousand mushrooms crowd to a keyhole.
This is the one star in their firmament
Or frames a star within a star.
What should they do there but desire?
So many days beyond the rhododendrons
With the world waltzing in its bowl of cloud,
They have learnt patience and silence
Listening to the rooks querulous in the high wood.
They have been waiting for us in a foetor
Of vegetable sweat since civil war days,
Since the gravel-crunching, interminable departure
Of the expropriated mycologist.
He never came back, and light since then
Is a keyhole rusting gently after rain.
Spiders have spun, flies dusted to mildew
A trickle of masonry, a shout from the blue
Or a lorry changing gear at the end of the lane.
There have been deaths, the pale flesh flaking
Into the earth that nourished it;
And nightmares, born of these and the grim
Dominion of stale air and rank moisture.
The rest, dim in a twilight of crumbling
Utensils and broken pitchers, groaning
For their deliverance, have been so long
Expectant that there is left only the posture.
Poor preparation for the cracking lock
And creak of hinges; magi, moonmen,
Powdery prisoners of the old regime,
Web-throated, stalked like triffids, racked by drought
And insomnia, only the ghost of a scream
At the flash-bulb firing-squad we wake them with
Shows there is life yet in their feverish forms.
Grown beyond nature now, soft food for worms,
They lift frail heads in gravity and good faith.
They are begging us, you see, in their wordless way,
To do something, to speak on their behalf
Or at least not to close the door again.
Lost people of Treblinka and Pompeii!
Who have come so far in darkness and in pain.
We too had our lives to live.
You with your light meter and relaxed itinerary,

What torture lurks within a single thought
When grown too constant; and however kind,
However welcome still, the weary mind
Aches with its presence. Dull remembrance taught
Remembers on unceasingly; unsought
The old delight is with us but to find
That all recurring joy is pain refined,
Become a habit, and we struggle, caught.
You lie upon my heart as on a nest,
Folded in peace, for you can never know
How crushed I am with having you at rest
Heavy upon my life. I love you so
You bind my freedom from its rightful quest.
In mercy lift your drooping wings and go.

What is a home? A guarded space, 
Shall sit together, face to face, 

Where cushioned walls rise up between 
The common pain, and pad and screen 

Where Art may blossom strong and free, 
And every laden moment be 

And Past and Future, softly veiled 
Forgotten half, and unassailed 

While the luxurious Present weaves 
Broiders her garments, heaps her sheaves, 

Can it be this, the longed-for thing 
Unsheltered beggars, birds on wing, 

No. Art may bloom, and peace and bliss; 
But if there be no more than this, 

Dim image from far glory caught, 
The true home rises in our thought, 

Its lamps burn freely in the night, 
Their cheering and abounding light 

Each sweet and secret thing within 
A thankful breath, sent forth to win 

The few, they bask in closer heat; 
Life higher seems, the world more sweet, 

So the old miracle anew 
And crumbs apportioned for a few, 

1.

Morning: the caged baby
sustains his fragile sleep.
The house is a husk against weather.
With the leaves fallen,
the tree makes a web on the window
and through it the world
lacks color or texture,
like stones in the pasture
seen from this distance.

This is what is done with pain:
ice on the wound,
as though to check an open vein
where the self pumps out of the self
would stop the second movement of the heart,
diastolic, inclusive:
to love is to siphon loss into that chamber.

2.

What does it mean when a woman says,
if she sits all day in the tub;
if she worries her life like a dog a rat;
if her husband seems familiar but abstract,

Spared grief, they are given dread
as they tend the frail on either side of them.
Even their marriage is another child,
grown rude and querulous
since death practiced on them and withdrew.

He asks of her only a little lie,
a pale copy drawn from the inked stone
where they loll beside the unicorn,
great lovers then, two strangers
joined by appetite:
She wants something crisp and permanent,
an iron shawl across the bed
where they are laced together,
the moon bleaching the house,

3.

still spread on the kitchen table,
the list of endangered species.
How plain the animals are,
quaint, domestic,
but the names lift from the page:
Woundfin. Whooping Crane. Squawfish.
Black-footed Ferret. California Least Tern.

Dearest, the beast of Loch Ness, that shy,
broad-backed, two-headed creature,
may be a pair of whales or manatee,
male and female,
driven from their deep mud nest,
who cling to each other,
circling the surface of the lake.
I. 
WHAT was he doing, the great god Pan, 
Spreading ruin and scattering ban, 
Splashing and paddling with hoofs of a goat, 
And breaking the golden lilies afloat 

II. 
He tore out a reed, the great god Pan, 
The limpid water turbidly ran, 
And the broken lilies a-dying lay, 
And the dragon-fly had fled away, 

III. 
High on the shore sate the great god Pan, 
And hacked and hewed as a great god can, 
With his hard bleak steel at the patient reed, 
Till there was not a sign of a leaf indeed 

IV. 
He cut it short, did the great god Pan, 
Then drew the pith, like the heart of a man, 
Steadily from the outside ring, 
And notched the poor dry empty thing 

V. 
 This is the way,' laughed the great god Pan, 
 The only way, since gods began 
To make sweet music, they could succeed.' 
Then, dropping his mouth to a hole in the reed, 

VI. 
Sweet, sweet, sweet, O Pan ! 
Blinding sweet, O great god Pan ! 
The sun on the hill forgot to die, 
And the lilies revived, and the dragon-fly 

VII. 
Yet half a beast is the great god Pan, 
Making a poet out of a man : 
For the reed which grows nevermore again 

God love you
lost in the horde
on this Friday night,
500 men are moving up
& down from the bath
room to the bar.
Remove this desire
from the man I love.
Who has opened
of the sea to me.
See to it that
his wants are filled
on California street
Bestow on him lar-
gesse that allows him
peace in his loins.
Leave him not
to the moths.
Make him out a lion
so that all who see him
hero worship his
thick chest as I did
moving my mouth
over his back bringing
our hearts to heights
I never hike over
Let blond hair burn
on the back of his
neck, let no ache
screw his face
up in pain, his soul
Not heroin.
Rather fix these
hundred men as his
lovers & lift him
with the enormous bale
of their desire.
6.20.58

Put nothing down to distress the reader.
No barking dog.
No rustle in the place whispers belong
or photos of petals near collapse.
Erase oranges of confusing taste, a face
wrinkled or in pain,
a map with waterless rivers or water
without a bend,
still in darkness. Here, where mystery

beyond hope comes too near,
make a bright flight of leaves
descend, none to smear all our spotless
rivers. A map folds and unfolds, does not
bunch or wrinkle. Rainbows to last.
The First Endlessness of Eden.
This was the spot I was to start on, a leg
steps out of the lake,
a step falters instead into dashes that spread without prints onto the screaming bank.

Tiny bit of humanity,

And looking away,
Through the ceiling of the room, and beyond.
Can it be that already you are thinking of being a poet?

To grow up and be a banker
About being a poet.

Of the sweet pain of love
And the keen joy of living;
Through the eternal beauty.
They talk abracadabra
In an unknown tongue,
Each one fashioning for himself
A wordy world of shadow problems,
And as a self-imagined Atlas,
Groaning out incoherent complaints at his load.

And, probably, always will be.

Not to be a poet.

when we met
and you say

it was easier
to fall for me thinking

this pause)
dead by now.

Talking. Falling.
Thinking. Waiting . . .
Have I 

undone 
You say no.

You say the surprise
of still being
is something

the machine of our living,
this saltwork of luck,

stylish, safe,
comfortable and 
unintended.

had the opportunity
to tell you, but

our lovely little dog
has just killed 
a possum.

a possum entering
the argument here.

But I lay it down
before us:
because an ugly

played dead

its dubious cunning
was brought to an end
outside our door

by our brutal, beautiful
and very pleased
little dog.

So how do I say
that this is not
about death or sadness

or even whether
you really
first loved me

waiting, thinking
dying young?

standing there 
a few minutes ago

holding a dead possum
by its repellent
bony tail,

I was struck by how
eerily pleased I was
to be a spectator

to teeth, spit,
agony and claw,
feeling full of purpose,

thinking how different
in our adversaries
we are from possums.

the fist of words,
their opening hand.

And whether we play
dead or alive,
our pain, the slow

circulation of happiness,
our salt and work,
the stubborn questions

we endlessly
give names to
haunt us with choice.

There is a land of pure delight 
Infinite day excludes the night, 

There everlasting spring abides, 
Death like a narrow sea divides 

Sweet fields beyond the swelling flood 
So to the Jews old Canaan stood, 

But timorous mortals start and shrink 
And linger shivering on the brink, 

Oh could we make our doubts remove, 
And see the Canaan that we love, 

Could we but climb where Moses stood 

I
That was I, you heard last night,
     When there rose no moon at all,
Nor, to pierce the strained and tight
     Tent of heaven, a planet small:
Life was dead and so was light.

               II
Not a twinkle from the fly,
     Not a glimmer from the worm;
When the crickets stopped their cry,
     When the owls forbore a term,
You heard music; that was I.

               III
Earth turned in her sleep with pain,
     Sultrily suspired for proof:
In at heaven and out again,
Bloodlike, some few drops of rain.

               IV
What they could my words expressed,
     O my love, my all, my one!
Singing helped the verses best,
     And when singing's best was done,
To my lute I left the rest.

               V
So wore night; the East was gray,
     White the broad-faced hemlock-flowers:
There would be another day;
     Ere its first of heavy hours
Found me, I had passed away.

               VI
What became of all the hopes,
     Words and song and lute as well?
     Feebly for the path where fell
Light last on the evening slopes,

               VII
"One friend in that path shall be,
     To secure my step from wrong;
One to count night day for me,
     Patient through the watches long,
Serving most with none to see."

               VIII
     "So, the worst has yet a worse!
When life halts 'neath double loads,
     Better the taskmaster's curse
Than such music on the roads!

               IX
"When no moon succeeds the sun,
     Nor can pierce the midnight's tent
Any star, the smallest one,
     While some drops, where lightning rent,

               X
"When the fire-fly hides its spot,
     When the garden-voices fail
     Shall another voice avail,
That shape be where these are not?

               XI
"Has some plague a longer lease,
     Proffering its help uncouth?
Can't one even die in peace?
     As one shuts one's eyes on youth,
Is that face the last one sees?"

               XII
Oh how dark your villa was,
     Windows fast and obdurate!
How the garden grudged me grass
Ground its teeth to let me pass!

Men of England, wherefore plough
For the lords who lay ye low?
Wherefore weave with toil and care
The rich robes your tyrants wear?

Wherefore feed and clothe and save
From the cradle to the grave
Those ungrateful drones who would

Wherefore, Bees of England, forge
Many a weapon, chain, and scourge,
That these stingless drones may spoil
The forced produce of your toil?

Have ye leisure, comfort, calm,
Or what is it ye buy so dear
With your pain and with your fear?

The seed ye sow, another reaps;
The wealth ye find, another keeps;
The robes ye weave, another wears;
The arms ye forge, another bears.

In hall ye deck another dwells.
Why shake the chains ye wrought? Ye see
The steel ye tempered glance on ye.

With plough and spade and hoe and loom
Trace your grave and build your tomb
England be your Sepulchre.

brooch missing, somewhere, a man recoils at the absence
of his gambling stash. somewhere, a miser rifles
over a vanished ransom in newly minted silver

all this to buy a hotbed of memories
to feed the children fresh-killed lies
to open all the locks on love

forever is a moment we hold in our stomachs

as he brushes the smudge of his kiss
across my lips, i smell the cologne of his fear
a robust and smoky aroma mingled
with the woody musk of courtrooms and the stench of
pain-paved alleyways

i take these things and promise to say mum

The amities of morning 
in their intelligent wings; 

beating solitudinous rocks 

and murmurous 
and beating, of the mind 
as some half-forgotten name . . . 

the rain has withdrawn 
like the hard-to-believe- 
in days of our childhood. 

Light moves, the whole 
returning; 
the gouty rat and straggly 

root collaborate. Earth 
with the billowy sky 

is the field- 
the various fruits: 
road, a girl passionate 

like his once endless 
strengths, his poems head- 

long. And one fills 
the birds brimming fire- 

breath never balked, a many- 
membered bird-flight, 

should include all, 
The eyes passing, 
contracted from night 

and war the stars 
and those eyes roam 

free as the Greeks: 
gleaming, there is home.

A bone shop, soaked in pearl, a dumping-
Ground for rarities, the sea-maws pumping

With unimaginable wealth, the spoil
Of deaf-mute drownings, the immemorial

The formal, hidden iceberg, slant, oblique

(A metaphysic harp from sky to heel)
Hang in the flesh that dangles from the creel

In spring, coil after coil, on moistened clay,
Though similar to the serpent wriggling away,
Are but facsimiles, though not quite dead.

Whose inching tape maneuvered in the sun
To measure every guilty length of Eden.

For pain or absence of it, marries love
Of one kind of another. In his grove,

Clutched in one hand, and the Sundy funnies spread

As soup, the mudflats where night crawlers came,
Tempted by the water tops to change the lame

Hot on our backs abnormal dryness, shadow
Forming in the seanets, seaweed into meadow,

Feathered and efficient, from tallest trees to stake
A claim so ravishing that now we undertake

Bespeak its ancient languages. The salt
Our tears and blood must harbor from its vault

She was in terrible pain the whole day,
as she had been for months: a slipped disc,
and there is nothing more painful. She

just beginning to make a name for her
nom de plume. As with most things in life,

it happened when she was changing channels
on her television. The lucky man, on the other
hand, was smiling for the first time

in his life, and it was fake. He was
an aspiring philosopher of dubious potential,
very serious, but somehow lacking in

essential depth. He could have been
an adequate undertaker. It was not the first
time for either of them. It was a civil

service, with no music, few flowers.
Still, there was a slow and erratic tide

And flashcubes, instant photos, some blurred
what they were meant to be. The bride slept

through much of it, and never did we figure out
who was on whose team. I think the groom

to arrive, nor the last to leave. Who knows,
it may all turn out for the best. And who

really cares about such special days, they
are not what we live for.

i want to have your child
cuz upon losing you

i do not mean to be fatalistic
know the limits put on you black man
me, black woman

when you are killed or imprisoned
desert or separate from me
fill the void of your absence with
love between me and ours

gods

you love me
pain
america will never let you

one more night in your arms

merge our bodies merge
give
wealth/freedom
congress cannot legislate away

eyes wide as suns inquire

i love my daddy

i smile

eyes wide as suns
burn my hand with a kiss
go outside to play in the streets

god 
what god is about

It is portentous, and a thing of state 
That here at midnight, in our little town 
A mourning figure walks, and will not rest, 
Near the old court-house pacing up and down. 

Or by his homestead, or in shadowed yards 
He lingers where his children used to play, 
Or through the market, on the well-worn stones 
He stalks until the dawn-stars burn away. 

A bronzed, lank man! His suit of ancient black, 
A famous high top-hat and plain worn shawl 
Make him the quaint great figure that men love, 
The prairie-lawyer, master of us all. 

He cannot sleep upon his hillside now. 
And we who toss and lie awake for long 
Breathe deep, and start, to see him pass the door. 

His head is bowed. He thinks on men and kings. 
Yea, when the sick world cries, how can he sleep? 
Too many peasants fight, they know not why, 
Too many homesteads in black terror weep. 

The sins of all the war-lords burn his heart. 
He sees the dreadnaughts scouring every main. 
He carries on his shawl-wrapped shoulders now 
The bitterness, the folly and the pain. 

He cannot rest until a spirit-dawn 
The league of sober folk, the Workers' Earth, 
Bringing long peace to Cornland, Alp and Sea. 

It breaks his heart that kings must murder still, 
That all his hours of travail here for men 
That he may sleep upon his hill again?

Bethlehem in Germany,
Glitter on the sloping roofs,
Breadcrumbs on the windowsills,
Candles in the Christmas trees,
Hearths with pairs of empty shoes:
Panels of Nativity
Open paper scenes where doors
Open into other scenes,
Some recounted, some foretold.
Blizzard-sprinkled flakes of gold
Gleam from small interiors,
Picture-boxes in the stars
Open up like cupboard doors
In a cabinet Jesus built.

Southern German villagers,
Peasants in the mica frost,
See the comet streaming down,
Heavenly faces, each alone,
Faces lifted, startled, lost,
As if lightning lit the town.

Sitting in an upstairs window
Patiently the village scholar
Raises his nearsighted face,
Interrupted by the star.
Left and right his hands lie stricken
Useless on his heavy book.
When I lift the paper door
In the ceiling of his study
One canary-angel glimmers,
Flitting in the candelabra,
Peers and quizzes him: Rabbi,
What are the spheres surmounted by?
But his lips are motionless.
Child, what are you asking for?
Look, he gazes past the roofs,
Gazes where the bitter North,
Stretched across the empty place,
Opens door by door by door.

This is childhood's shrunken door.
When I touch the glittering crumbs,
When I cry to be admitted,
No one answers, no one comes.

And the tailor's needle flashes
In midair with thread pulled tight,
Stitching a baptismal gown.
But the gown, the seventh door,
Turns up an interior
Hidden from the tailor's eyes:
Baby presents like the boxes
Angels hold on streets and stairways,
Wooden soldier, wooden sword,
Chocolate coins in crinkled gold,
Hints of something bought and sold,
Hints of murder in the stars.
Baby's gown is sown with glitter
Spread across the tailor's lap.
Up above his painted ceiling
Baby mouse's skeleton
Crumbles in the mouse's trap.

Leaning from the cliff of heaven,
Indicating whom he weeps for,
Joseph lifts his lamp above
The infant like a candle-crown.
Let my fingers touch the silence
Where the infant's father cries.
Give me entrance to the village
From my childhood where the doorways
Open pictures in the skies.
But when all the doors are open,
No one sees that I've returned.
When I cry to be admitted,
No one answers, no one comes.
Clinging to my fingers only
Pain, like glitter bits adhering,
When I touch the shining crumbs.

Blood scissored down his chin.
myself and starving him. He knocked
me so my nose coughed blood,
punched a finger through my cornea.
Blood blubbed on my nipple
where his gums met. On the radio
somebody was saying something about Syria.
My son jerked knots of hair from my head,
him once against the doorjamb:
when we were younger, drinking harder,
made blood come then. Twice I tried to leave
him screaming, twenty minutes at a time,
One breakfast I broke the mug that insisted
Smashed it. And all the time
I smiled so much my teeth dried.
He made everything heavy.
Like they say the bomb did for a while,
so that Americans swam
through their homes, eyes peeled,
picking up everyday things and dropping them
as though they were violated with light and pain.

whose letters cease to arrive
aloft as a principle of life--

Oh you, the sprightliest & most puggish, the brightest star
Of all my lively loves, all Ladies, & to whom once I gave up
My heart entire, thenceforth yours to keep forever
To throw away, carelessly, at your leisure, should that prove
Your best pleasure, Who is that dumpy matron, decked out in worn &
Shabby army fatigues which pooch out both before & behind, now
And once more, even, fiercely pecking at me in the cold drab Parish
Who is that midget-witch who preens & prances as she flaunts her lost
& flapping, & who
Is shrieking even now these mean words:
at me, & croons, gleefully.
& She is claiming to be you
She brings out from inside that small purse, my withered heart; &
lifting it
high into the air over her head with her two hands, she turns it upside
unzips its fasteners, & shakes it out over the plywood floor, happily.
I watch her, and think,
Your ribbon I wear, your favor tied to the grip of my lance, when I

I carved upon my desk unsayables.
He drank until he vomited on himself.
Eavesdropping, the others resisted sleep.
The house knew the pain of sun on lacquered floorboards.

I carved it with the tips of scissors.
A door creaked; he hung his head into the room.
Please, the others cannot sleep.
The shingles twitched like skin beneath moonlight.

I spent the afternoon at a movie theater.
He staggered through brush toward a pay phone.
The others continued searching the streets for him.
The house held the moon above it, it was that imperial.

I recall the room was empty when I came back in.
He was arrested at the Quik-Trip while calling collect.
Frantic, the others circled the block again.
The house was ghost-white, older than the dead.

I needle-pointed for 72 hours straight.
He claimed the whole situation humiliated him.
Relieved, the others refrained from asking him what jail was like.
The house was swan to field, tiger to sea.

I lay in bed by the time the others came home.
He couldn't recall putting on the orange jumpsuit.
The others asked if I'd seen him around.

The house winced, winked its blinds.
The house whispered I should stay inside.
The others flew out the doors and into their cars.
The others slammed their cars into deer and cried.

He was more humiliated than he'd ever been.
He looked more or less the same, though his eyes were ringed.
The others hid in the basement.
He climbed the stairs and presented a ring.

The house swung its windows wide to ice.
He banged his nails blue, pinned his tongue to his tie.
He packed himself in a box, sent it to regions far off.
The others pressed their ears to the pipes.

The house called a radio talk-show.
We drank all night, laughed all night, the night he left.
I shook in its mouth till the house drank me up.

I
However the image enters
its force remains within
my eyes
learning to survive
where there is no food
my eyes are always hungry
and remembering
however the image enters
its force remains.
A white woman stands bereft and empty
recalled in me forever
etched into my visions
food for dragonfish that learn
to live upon whatever they must eat
fused images beneath my pain.

A Mississippi summer televised.
Trapped houses kneel like sinners in the rain
now awash
a tattered baby's blanket in her arms.
a microphone
thrust up against her flat bewildered words
caked around the edges
her pale eyes scanning the camera for help or explanation
unanswered
hanging upon her coat like mirrors
and that lie hangs in his mouth
like a shred of rotting meat.

I inherited Jackson, Mississippi.
on plump boy-cheeks
his only Mississippi summer
whistling a 21 gun salute to Dixie
in the midnight waters of the Pearl.

His broken body is the afterimage of my 21st year
when I walked through a northern summer
my eyes averted
the avid insistence of detail
pretending insight or information
the length of gash across the dead boy's loins
his gouged out eyes
louder than life
all over
bruise upon livid bruise
and wherever I looked that summer
I learned to be at home with children's blood
with savored violence
like a raped woman's face.

A black boy from Chicago
whistled on the streets of Jackson, Mississippi
testing what he'd been taught was a manly thing to do
his teachers
and flung him to the Pearl weighted with stone
in the name of white womanhood
they took their aroused honor
back to Jackson
the double ritual of white manhood
confirmed.

Emmett Till rides the crest of the Pearl, whistling
(what did she pay to never know its price?)
and I can withhold my pity and my bread.

with ancient and familiar sorrows
a woman surveying her crumpled future
never allowed her own tongue
without power or conclusion
unvoiced
and a man with an executioner's face
pulls her away.

Within my eyes
the flickering afterimages of a nightmare rain
a woman wrings her hands
beneath the weight of agonies remembered
betrayed by vision
hers and my own
the horrors we are living
with tortured lungs
adapting to breathe blood.

A woman measures her life's damage
my eyes are caves, chunks of etched rock
whistling
crying and frightened
and soundlessly
a woman begins to weep.

At a party I spy a handsome psychiatrist,
And wish, as we all do, to get her advice for free.
We learn that happiness is a Chinese meal,
While sorrow is a nourishment forever.
My new environment is California Dreamer.
And, Doctor, another thing has got me worried:
At home, I want to write a happy poem
On love, or a love poem of happiness.
The rub, the minor abrasions of any two
But in this chapter, tragedy belongs
To that other life, the old life before us.
Here is my aphorism of the day:
Happy people are monogamous.
Even in California. So how does the poem play
Without the paraphernalia of betrayal and loss?
My former husband, that old disaster, is now just funny,
So laugh we do, in what Cyril Connolly
Has called the endless, nocturnal conversation
Of marriage. Which may be the best part.
Darling, must I love you in light verse
Without the tribute of profoundest art?
Or I yours, by dying. I could weep over that.
But now it seems forced, here in these heaven hills,
The mourning doves mourning, the squirrels mating,
My old cat warm in my lap, here on our terrace
As from below comes a musical cursing
As you mend my favorite plate. Later of course
I could pick a fight; there is always material in that.
Who scream out red-hot iambs in their hate.
No, love, the heavy poem will have to come
From temps perdu, fertile with pain, or perhaps
Detonated by terrors far beyond this place
Where the world rends itself, and its tainted waters
Rise in the east to erode our safety here.
Much as I want to gather a lifetime thrift
And craft, my cunning skills tied in a knot for you,

As I reach to close each book
to snap at my fingers. My legs
My fingers pain me
at my touch.
like children, carefully turning
their creases. I use books
almost apologetically. I believe
and get a smile, knowing
it is for the sake of politeness.
among the human race and yet
nothing is said at all
because of that.
But no book will help either.
I stroke my desk,
I set a typewriter on its surface
and begin to type
to tell myself my troubles.
Against the evidence, I live by choice.

 no family, and with suspect style. 
no family, and with suspect style.
November first, my almost-groom
fresh off his flasher costume 
fresh off his flasher costume
discharge at the office. Harris tweed.
I read it on his antisocial feed. 
I read it on his antisocial feed.

we were, as they say, living the dream. 
we were, as they say, living the dream.
I appreciate our quandary, 
hot-plate dates and frowsy laundry. 
hot-plate dates and frowsy laundry.
Face tattoos are never a good sign.
I hope his tumor is benign. 
I hope his tumor is benign.

me Inches, which I gave up for Lent. 
me Inches, which I gave up for Lent.
Our love was threat, like phantom pain.
An almost-plan for a bullet train. 
An almost-plan for a bullet train.
not taking on any new disease. 
not taking on any new disease.

I walk along Pier 5 to kill the myth,
of course another stab at myth. 
of course another stab at myth.
I pull my output from the shelf
and wildly anthologize myself. 
and wildly anthologize myself.
I hope to die inside this cab. 
I hope to die inside this cab.

no wait, the lack of punctuation. 
no wait, the lack of punctuation.
Every intonation, one more pact
with injury; my latest one-act: 
with injury; my latest one-act:
In the spattered glass of the republic.
In the spattered glass of the republic.
Featherweight lawn chair, cooler for a footrest,
and me a squatter on the landlord's dock
where baitstealers teased a thousand times a day
until rowdy boats and summer scared them deep.
Day and night I snoozed on the porch
beneath a filthy orbit of fanblades
to the opera of my neighbors fighting
and reconciling in the glow of stolen wattage.

I saw them swimming once. Maybe naked,
judging from their skittish talk, but the water
smeared their bodies' pale particulars.
It was just me and the Tickfaw River.
Me with the taste of a tin can in my mouth,
feeling no pain, lighting a cigarette backwards,
the Tickfaw tricking me closer and closer
with echoes and music out of nowhere.

Is it funny that I was too lit to notice
twenty-five orange yards of extension cord
stretching from my outlet, over the driveway shells,
to feed the hungry plug of their deep freezer?
Mother would have pitched a fit if she discovered
the stash of whiskey in the woodpile,
and my father wasn't laughing
if he looked down from his company of stars.

Says that America is for him a maximum-security prison

Like a boiling Jacuzzi full of ballpeen hammers, even then he feels

Of the thick satin quilt of America

or whether he is just spin doctoring a better grade,

It was not blood but money

And so I perish happily,

Would never speak in rhymed couplets,

And I look at the student with his acne and cell phone and phony ghetto clothes

And I remember what Marx said near the end of his life:

But how could he have imagined 100 channels of 24-hour cable
Or what kind of nightmare it might be

When each day you watch rivers of bright merchandise run past you
And you are floating in your pleasure boat upon this river

Even while others are drowning underneath you
And you see their faces twisting in the surface of the waters

And yet it seems to be your own hand
Which turns the volume higher?

But to whatever animal we ascribe these remains, it is certain such a one has existed in America, and that it has been the largest of all terrestrial beings. It should have sufficed to have rescued the earth it inhabited, and the atmosphere it breathed, from the imputation of impotence. . . .
I called for armour, rose, and did not reel.
But when I thought . . .
My wound open wide.
 THE STATES
For he can creep.
Whose doctor said his bipolar was pre-existing.
Smacked in the head by a steel cargo door,
hinges tied with a hamburger bag.
The day he blew up: a sucking silence, mouth of tar,
bump and rattle, caissons rolling.
The blacked-out school bus window is
scratched to read GHOST RECON. Street signs flash by,
to Andrews Air Force, wheelchair bus to Walter Reed.
Wounded when burning poppies, now afloat
The navigator slides along a wall:
Where the gazebo is a tank. Where the manhole covers a bomb.
Who apologize for shaving cuts. Skull plate,
They limp by drug dealers for their scoop
of Baskin-Robbins. Are told,
Who are saved, but die in dreams,
salute with a mechanical arm.
CONSTITUTION AVE, CAPITALSAURUS DAY
Beneath the marble, beneath the paper laws;
the paved boglands and legs-up taverns,
the slave-built steps of the Capitol. Winter 1898,
a sewer-man digs up a dinosaur spine,
tombed later at the Smithsonian
that rattled his pocket, cherished knuckle-bone
and proof against the French naturalist
wrote that New World dampness and cold
had stunted flora, animals, and Man:
Jefferson ordered Lewis & Clark to find
grazing somewhere west
which may be an ancestor of the Tyrannosaurus rex,
NOW, THEREFORE, I, MAYOR OF THE DISTRICT
OF COLUMBIA, do hereby proclaim January 28, 2001,
Anthony A. Williams
DISCOVERY IN SIBERIA
Reindeer of the herdsman Jarkov nuzzle
a tusk frozen 20,000 years. Soon,
French naturalists arrive. Radar shows
the Holy Grail of Mammoth hunters,
Timber saws cut the block. Hoisted by
gulag caves, frozen labs for scientist-prisoners,
now re-opened. Waving hair-dryers
can film them planting clone eggs
inside an elephant, hatching a Mammoth
American defender to split the ramparts,
show scheduled for release in 2001
the monkeys learn to talk;
the Capitalsaurus and the new President Bush;
when Mohammed Atta decides he
SECURITAS
Weary headlands roll through zones of night,
red lights flash the muted streets,
We sleep, staring. Tree-shapes and stars prod us,
And the king, our godsbody, lies abed
His spit and sperm are tallied; his temperature,
a weather report told by doctors. Until
her bloodlined hands, the blank, bureaucratic face!
We pray with our bodies: cold sweat, a hymn
of twitches, heart racing, shrieking dreams . . .
But fragrant Securitas has only
To compass him about.
Lifting out her breast.
Stoppers his mouth with a thick nipple.
Squeezing till the ichor throbs from his eyes,
IRAQ & TEXAS: DJINN ROADS
 Helicopters park at Forward Base EXXON;
 only the sand is flying today, and it breaks
 the speed limits, 50 miles an hour. Visibility zero;
 the air is hot as blood, the sky is burnt amber.
In Texas, teens patrol the roads by night,
George, fishtailing dauphin, a graceful
falldown drunk, clouds the breathalyzer:
yellowcake Chevy mows down her boyfriend:
VEHICULAR HOMICIDE: the car found guilty.
sweats beneath foundation garments and paste.
His unmarked body, and fructifying breath,
They walk, O my darling, the hill of light;
 Then it rains. What falls from the sky is not water
 but mud, raindrops pulling clouds of sand
 Col. Gibbs. Lights a cigarette, his back to the storm:
HOTEL AFTERMATH
 From the dust, the limbs jerk up alive, stagger home
 to camp. Martian: neck gators for the nose, goggles
 seal off the eyes, baby wipes. WHAT DID YOU FIND THERE?
 A slipper, an ear, some wire. A chemical suit.
no Frankenstein DNA. They rewrite the Mammoth show.
Whose mother swallows all the soldier medicine.
to give his body. They try in their power,
the maid said it was cow bones. Sweet heartland,
Governor Meriwether Lewis
shoots himself in the chest and head.
Who sit by the apples and wingback chairs.
Who cannot count his change.

The survey says all groups can make more money 
if they lose weight except black men...men of other colors 
and women of all colors have more gold, but black men 
are the summary of weight, a lead thick thing on the scales, 
meters spinning until they ring off the end of the numbering 
of accumulation, how things grow heavy, fish on the 
ends of lines that become whales, then prehistoric sea life 
beyond all memories, the billion days of human hands 
working, doing all the labor one can imagine, hands 
now the population of cactus leaves on a papyrus moon 
waiting for the fire, the notes from all their singing gone 
up into the salt breath of tears of children that dry, rise 
up to be the crystalline canopy of promises, the infinite 
gone fishing days with the apologies for not being able to love 
anymore, gone down inside earth somewhere where 
women make no demands, have fewer dreams of forever, 
these feet that marched and ran and got cut off, these hearts 
torn out of chests by nameless thieves, this thrashing 
until the chaff is gone out and black men know the gold 
of being the dead center of things, where pain is the gateway 
to Jerusalems, Bodhi trees, places for meditation and howling, 
keeping the weeping heads of gods in their eyes.

Love is no more.
It died as the mind dies: the pure desire
Relinquishing the blissful form it wore,
The ample joy and clarity expire.

Regret is vain.
Then do not grieve for what you would efface,
The sudden failure of the past, the pain
Of its unwilling change, and the disgrace.

Leave innocence,
And modify your nature by the grief
Which poses to the will indifference
That no desire is permanent in sense.

Take leave of me.
What recompense, or pity, or deceit
Can cure, or what assumed serenity
Conceal the mortal loss which we repeat?

The mind will change, and change shall be relief.

All hail to the Rev. George Gilfillan of Dundee, 
He is the greatest preacher I did ever hear or see. 
He is a man of genius bright, 
And in him his congregation does delight, 
Because they find him to be honest and plain, 
Affable in temper, and seldom known to complain. 
He preaches in a plain straightforward way, 
The people flock to hear him night and day, 
Because he is the greatest preacher of the present day. 
He has written the life of Sir Walter Scott, 
And while he lives he will never be forgot, 
Nor when he is dead, 
Because by his admirers it will be often read; 
And fill their minds with wonder and delight, 
He has also written about the Bards of the Bible, 
Which occupied nearly three years in which he was not idle, 
Because when he sits down to write he does it with might and main, 
And to get an interview with him it would be almost vain, 
And in that he is always right, 
For the Bible tells us whatever your hands findeth to do, 
Do it with all your might. 
Rev. George Gilfillan of Dundee, I must conclude my muse, 
And to write in praise of thee my pen does not refuse, 
Nor does it give me pain to tell the world fearlessly, that when 
You are dead they shall not look upon your like again.

PART ONE

I

Slip-pilings on the Brooklyn littoral
with its walledup doors wan doorshapes
on eroded sills. Downstream, the strutwork
of the Williamsburg cable tower
threw its cool shadow half a mile inland
over tarpaper seams, gantried water butts,
and splintery tenement cornices milled
with acanthus and classical grasses
of nineteenth-century dream-slum fantasy.
We could see, from our rooftops, the endspan
floating its ant-threads of traffic
to the granite salients of the anchorage,
and through its strands on the west

But it was our own foundations, crumbling
in the sandy soil, that made us protest
the drill rigs sounding for a wider bridge ramp
to funnel the airport traffic over us
tenements clinging near the anchorage
painfully Englished petitions. But City Hall
adoze, sleep-feeding, just flooded us

II

with chimerical figures and blueprints,
a Guatemalan law student at NYU
where I studied classics, distracted us
Maya mountain-language BUT
fawn-tinted oval face, and read in low tones

Luz told us Pilar had lost husband
and son to the Violence; a machine-gunned
came here, she came with her girl, we helped with the
bridge-inflicted, some-day disaster. And who knew
but our bridge might metamorphose,
and anyway, mainly, summer

III

was running out, with its open evenings
and windows. One Saturday, turning onto my block
from the subway, I heard my name, crossed
the street where twin buildings had area-ways.
and saw you waving, the same, Pilar,
from a window below the swag-bellied area railings.
I walked down the building-side, and turned in a trash-littered
airwell by a door with multiple doorbells.
You opened from a wooden hallway, unpainted,
for illegals. They took out an inside wall, so our room
was the building front, the three others
drywall. On the bureau, a black-shawled
prie-dieu: two photos; two candles in translucent, white-waxed sacks,
and a polychrome Madonna with meeting brows.

Through your window, car wheels, railings; and, above,
You sat me on the sofa, and formally presented your daughter
(she moved her schoolbooks all to one end.) Near her, a shallow,
linoleumed-over trench and a bathroom sink. You said:
Then you paused, and I felt how clearly
I tried to add something else at once, to leave this less ...
definitive, but nothing came, so we ran through bridge-rumors,
and soon we were hardly listening, waiting
for our own next word, and laughing at our gabble. Pequita
told us what the priest had said
First Communion, and none of us could stop
finding striking things to say. Next day you came over
to see my plants, and I came back for soup-supper, looking up
at my windows, which in the easy half-yellow light
of autumn looked oddly beckoning. As we ate,
and mockingly proposed that we three walk across the bridge,
had you listened to our committee?) And when I got home
I looked down, and through your sheer curtains saw you
cleaning up, and Pequita, at the table, reading.

IV

But next week, instead of the plank stair
that zigzags up the anchorage-side, we wandered
the riverside shipping alleys. From below, we could see
overhead the under-arch of the bridge, and feel
the resonant top-thrum of westbound
this part. A sort of post-industrial fenworld, with tiny
terrace houses, big dredger-parts laid aside
filled with sea-floor light and trembling, long-awned
panicles of switchgrass. Its timelessness
tuckpointed facade, and a pair of brandnew bronze
Edwardian mermaid doorknockers. I could see
discount chains, tentative boutiques,
and mother and daughter figuring, to the upscale
with strange literalness among them, supplying
their just-permissible quantum of urban grit.

You were ahead, and Pequita trailed us, rattling weed stalks
with a stray lath. As we progressed in and out
green puddles, to a broken-off building wall. It had been
plaster squares trailing sawn pipes, with one high trembling
toilet, like a pearl. In a lower square, fringed
with ailanthus and barbs of gang graffiti,
was a mural. Muy latino: the mountain
dreaming the city: a terrace cafe with palm trees
and a dancer shawled in black lace, with inward-angled
castanets. And you lifted yourself on tiptoe,
Pilar, to touch the lace, as you might have grazed
sturdy inside your sturdy body, not this gesture
back, museum-wise, to contemplate, and you said:
pointed out more wall palms, beaches, until New York
seemed a dot in a belt of capitals
high on the globe: world-cities, packed
with immigrants, refugees, Gastarbeiter: a snowy
latitude suffused with tropical nostalgia.

V

We were a threesome. Coffee, suppers, TV,
or sleeping on my sofa, one bad month
they moved you to night shift. Yet only that summer,
in a lamplit bay, the night filled with myriad noises,
tenement-faces, florid, all bucrania, meanders, dusky trails
of fire-escape bedding. And everything underlit
by the sinister, slow-stopping car lights of our street.

But now it was the dailiness of two
from another hemisphere. Through snow-fissures, winds fluting
on railings and building-flaws, Pilar in her low frame
paced with armfuls of laundry, washed
in the sink and hung to dry everywhere. The thousand
stratagems of those who simply must not spend;
and the tiny mother-decisions: though you preferred
periphery, housekeeping around her,
you up on the sofa when you had flu, and bring you
I saw too, that of what I wanted the university

with one of the tiny cats of Rome, he leaped 
on my arm and half hung on to the food and half 
hung on to my shirt and coat. I tore it apart 
and let him have his portion, I think I lifted him 
down, sandwich and all, on the sidewalk and sat 
with my own sandwich beside him, maybe I petted 
his bony head and felt him shiver. I have 
told this story over and over; some things 
root in the mind; his boldness, of course, was frightening 
drove him mad. It was the breaking of boundaries, 
the sudden invasion, but not only that it was 
the sharing of food and the sharing of space; he didn't 
run into an alley or into a cellar, 
he sat beside me, eating, and I didn't run 
into a trattoria, say, shaking, 
with food on my lips and blood on my cheek, sobbing; 
but not only that, I had gone there to eat 
and wait for someone. I had maybe an hour 
before she would come and I was full of hope 
and excitement. I have resisted for years 
interpreting this, but now I think I was given 
a clue, or I was giving myself a clue, 
across the street from the glass sandwich shop. 
That was my last night with her, the next day 
I would leave on the train for Paris and she would 
meet her husband. Thirty-five years ago 
I ate my sandwich and moaned in her arms, we were 
dying together; we never met again 
a daughter or son somewhere, darling grandchildren 
in Norwich, Connecticut, or Canton, Ohio. 
Every five years I think about her again 
and plan on looking her up. The last time 
I was sitting in New Brunswick, New Jersey, 
and heard that her husband was teaching at Princeton, 
if she was still married, or still alive, and tried 
calling. I went that far. We lived 
in Florence and Rome. We rowed in the bay of Naples 
and floated, naked, on the boards. I started 
to think of her again today. I still 
am horrified by the cat's hunger. I still 
am puzzled by the connection. This is another 
insane devotion, there must be hundreds, although 
it isn't just that, there is no pain, and the thought 
is fleeting and sweet. I think it's my own dumb boyhood, 
walking around with Slavic cheeks and burning 
stupid eyes. I think I gave the cat 
half of my sandwich to buy my life, I think 
I broke it in half as a decent sacrifice. 
It was this I bought, the red coleus, 
the split rocking chair, the silk lampshade. 
Happiness. I watched him with pleasure. 
I bought memory. I could have lost it. 
How crazy it sounds. His face twisted with cunning. 
The wind blowing through his hair. His jaw working.

with one of the tiny cats of Rome, he leaped
on my arm and half hung on to the food and half
hung on my shirt and coat. I tore it apart
and let him have his portion, I think I lifted him
down, sandwich and all, on the sidewalk and sat
with my own sandwich beside him, maybe I petted
his bony head and felt him shiver. I have
told this story over and over; some things
root in the mind; his boldness, of course, was frightening
drove him mad. It was the breaking of boundaries,
the sudden invasion, but not only that, it was
run into an alley or into a cellar,
with food on my lips and blood on my cheek, sobbing;
but not only that, I had gone there to eat
and wait for someone. I had maybe an hour
before she would come and I was full of hope
and excitement. I have resisted for years
interpreting this, but now I think I was given
a clue, or I was giving myself a clue,
That was my last night with her, the next day
I would leave on the train for Paris and she would
meet her husband. Thirty-five years ago
I ate my sandwich and moaned in her arms, we were
dying together; we never met again
in Norwich, Connecticut, or Canton, Ohio.
Every five years I think about her again
and plan on looking her up. The last time
I was sitting in New Brunswick, New Jersey,
and heard that her husband was teaching at Princeton,
calling. I went that far. We lived
in Florence and Rome. We rowed in the bay of Naples
and floated, naked, on the boards. I started
to think of her again today. I still
am puzzled by the connection. This is another
insane devotion, there must be hundreds, although
walking around with Slavic cheeks and burning
stupid eyes. I think I gave the cat
half of my sandwich to buy my life, I think
I broke it in half as a decent sacrifice.
It was this I bought, the red coleus,
the split rocking chair, the silk lampshade.
How crazy it sounds. His face twisted with cunning.
The wind blowing through his hair. His jaws working.

the bruise will stop by later.
For now, the pain pauses in its round,
leaves a memo for the surrogate: What the hell
did you think you were doing? I mean . . .
Oh well, less said the better, they all say.

God will find the pattern and break it.

I thank you for breaking the cycle, withstanding the enormity

Thank you to the policeman who took all the men whose safety

all the world to blame.

Thank you for picking up the handless, footless doll

and wait, patiently.

1.
It is cold enough for rain
to coagulate and fall in heavy drops.
Tonight a skin of ice will grow
over the bones of the smallest bush,

making it droop like the wrist
of someone carrying a heavy suitcase. This moving on,
from season to season, is exhausting
and violent, the break from the Berlin Wall

of winter especially. Like a frostbitten
hand coming to life, I color
first with warmth,
then with pain. Thawing, letting

the great powers go
their own way, in rivers and in flesh,
frightens me, as this day
warns me of an icy night.

2.
Each year I am astonished
at the havoc wrought
on other lives: fathers
made tiny by cancer;

a mother swollen around
a bad heart "brought on by aggravation."
To suffer is to do something new

a change of life
wish they were men, some men
wish they were dead; still,

there is coin in suffering . . .
It makes us rich
as Croesus in his golden tears,
and we are rarely hated for it.

This coin I store in a purse
made of my mother's
milk and flesh, which God says I must not mix.
I use it instead to seek pleasure.

3.
Walking around with this thing in me
all day, this loving cup
full of jelly, waiting for you

eight o'clock, eight-thirty . . .
What could be more important
than love? I can't imagine; you can.
Not a good day, not about to get better.

The bird comes complete
with heart, liver, and neck-bone
wrapped chastely in white paper.
Still half-frozen,

the legs are hard to separate.
Inside, wax paper sticks to the ribs.
I reach like a vet delivering pigs,

5.
Air the same sweet
temperature inside the house
as outside the house.
Stepping up from the cellar

with an armful of sheets,
I listen for the dirge of flies
under the chittering birds,
both painfully loud. There is a stridency

that's stubborn in a life
grown by inches: the fat
little fingers of buds bursting;
ugly ducklings; the slow war

of day against night.
As I pin the swelling sheets
with clothespins damp and too
narrow at the mouth, I wonder how

flies know to come out
to feed the birds, and feast themselves
on the new stillborn, this stubborn
great chain of being.

logos is the shadow of what happens.

squatting over barley-paste, hot goat, dried fig
as the shadow of estrangement from
but Mr. Broad Wit seized
evaporation from the street to isolate
spirit of
spearmint from what had always gone before.
sing coo-coo!), facts & symbols
beat of a million bovine feet
upon the tender luxury
Natural! in a sense. Never before
had such perfect innocence been explored
like new property.
looks pretty good till you can check out how it settles into the ground.
piled up like a plastic eyesore, fore-
shadowed a bloodless dry reign,
precipitation of pedestrain pedantry,
pedestrian mind for millenia, postulating
its pustulations of post- & pre-, professing
everything, subjugating us all in the tick-tech
burned-out success of a nob objectivity,
turning babble to a soapy
bubble up up & away until pop!
goes the wizard.

from golden sundance volumes of German silver
ah yes, essence, with its can-do incandescence,
from alla this quotidian sewage
& italicize it, boot it through the uprights

So anyway this guy imagined up God outa the play-dough
of his panicked exclusions
& then compounded the felony by trying to imitate the damn thing,
utopian Republic! Razional! Sozialismus!
use of light.
But despite all right & crystal wings, thinking
has no more reality than
of a Theater-of-Dionysus Port-O-Let.

Well, he thought he was correting a mess
& left a mess of
shadows for our meat.
If unity really strung out from above,
no babies to throw out with

Islands in the stream
of biosphere placidly gavotte
drinking play-tonic sprinkled geo-
metrically, until the teleology
The world pole-flips one more time, mechanically geo-
mantric, shakes the pants off of objective
dance to reveal gradual chance, just
numbers having a ball, as the rationale
of it all.

Back up a hemidemisecond! My better half
But the long hot summer of essentialism
toilet contemplative, inner-directed: a pure good-bye.

Yet it was hard (abstract thought),

& Anaximander had
illuminated life as shadows of whatever, up from sea-slime,
dissolving to the harmony of a sphere.

Logos, in the light, is only haze,
a honey-head, that the shape

(& the shadow structure
nor still distorted by leftover rays in the shadowee,
nor in such relation to light as shadowing implies:
then, as it loses all idea to total presence,
becomes invisible enough.
Half-known moves around the kitchen.
The cereal box is food for thought.
Hmm, cool today; better pull on my dark-blue paradigm.
The quality of nothing is not strained,
absolutely hot & cool, at the moment,
is, & likely to remain so.)

The wisest scholar of the wight most wise 
That Virtue, if it once met with our eyes, 
Strange flames of love it in our souls would raise; 
But, for that man with pain this truth descries, 
And so nor will nor can behold those skies 
Which inward sun to heroic mind displays, 
Virtue of late, with virtuous care to stir 
To mortal eyes might sweetly shine in her. 
It is most true, for since I her did see, 

Where love is chasteness, pain doth learn delight, 
And humbleness grows one with majesty. 
Whatever may ensue, O let me be 
Co-partner of the riches of that sight; 
O look, O shine, O let me die and see. 
For though I oft my self of them bemoan, 
That through my heart their beamy darts be gone, 
Whose cureless wounds even now most freshly bleed, 
Yet since my death wound is already got, 
Dear killer, spare not they sweet cruel shot; 
A kind of grace it is to slay with speed.

Give me hunger, 
O you gods that sit and give 
The world its orders. 
Give me hunger, pain and want, 
Shut me out with shame and failure 
From your doors of gold and fame, 
Give me your shabbiest, weariest hunger! 

But leave me a little love, 
A voice to speak to me in the day end, 
A hand to touch me in the dark room 
Breaking the long loneliness. 
In the dusk of day-shapes 
Blurring the sunset, 
One little wandering, western star 
Thrust out from the changing shores of shadow. 
Let me go to the window, 
Watch there the day-shapes of dusk 
And wait and know the coming 
Of a little love.

One of those appointments you postpone
until anxiety propels you to the phone,
then have to wait too long for, to take
an inconvenient time . . . Late in the day,
an old man and I watch the minute hand

to grade, but he wants someone to talk to,
my whole life in Waltham, worked 40 years

as beautiful the year I was eleven,
when Merle and I rode the Grove Street bus
to Moody Street to shoplift haircurlers

an old factory town, wooden triple-deckers,
water rats swimming in the oily river.
of crime in our well-kempt Auburndale

where we thought we were well-known,
and canoers paddled the same Charles River
past our homes. And I still wonder
what could have vanished when we rubbed
the mystery elixir on our silky cheeks?

His cheeks sucked in, this geezer could be
my grandfather forty years ago, so
I ignore his racist overture and agree
Waltham was beautiful, as the attendant
takes his Social Security card,

then mutters something else in Spanish.
the old guy brags. The kid forsakes

our ancient history, flexes his muscles.
to insults for an hour in the Elder Van,
nice? Yet hungry for a distracting

fact or story, I encourage the grandfather,
I want to be treated well myself some day,
My little bids for attention, my birds, fragile
fluttering words, desire to be visible and seen. . . .

from Sicily or Limerick, a seamstress

earning her hard living one town over.
I always sat this way with Doc, years
(besides my golden mother) a gold

a different time, when the things
but were permanent, a part of who you were.
So his elegant watch confused me toward
the idea my little dentist grandfather

had some connection to the company,
had been rewarded by a grateful boss.
His bit of luxury, the swirling monogram
on the back (which opened with a click),

IR, for Isaac Rosenberg, timepiece
connected by a chain to a safety pin
at his frayed striped trouser pocket;
another pin secured his Shawmut bankbook,

nearby the long-gone Waldorf Cafeteria
where he idled weekday mornings
with his cronies, also reminiscing,

of it), the Good Old Days before
the motorcar, before their children
moved away. Dexterity and skill gone, too,
from his arthritic hands. He relished
those mornings! The black-and-white

tiled floor, the nearly empty tables,
the Perfection Salad, Welsh rarebit,
They serve an elegant porridge there,
he told me, gourmet of the ordinary,

State-of-Maine-ah grandfather, my Mainiac.
The soon-to-be-widowed wives elsewhere,
polishing mahogany veneer, or playing
bridge, or shopping Coolidge Corner
from butcher to baker in prescient

black dresses. Old men and women
so relieved to be rid of the burden
of one another for a whole morning,
of the tired bickering sentences
of long American marriages, of pain

and disappointment. What memories
to grandchildren, and half-false anyway,
like studio photographs, mythic stories
they could live with; now forgotten,

or devout to rectify. I miss that
cafeteria, the whole idea of cafeterias,
although Doc never took me, just pointed
to it on our Sunday drive, repeating

paeans to gray porridge, something no
Waltham had them, too, free-fire zones
a kid alone could enter with five cents
for huge iced cookies, black-and-whites,

half chocolate, half vanilla, all Crisco
and white sugar, chewed in gluttonous
Merle and I did everything subversive

forbidden fruit: the 5 & 10, eyelash
curlers, odd metal torture instruments

I smuggled home that pinched my lids
and made my lashes angle wildly up,
delinquent startled in the bathroom
mirror; Tangee lipsticks the size
of my little finger, unflattering coral;

or wear the bony corset my grandmother
assured me was my fate. Oh, esoteric glamorous
puzzle of the vanished vanishing cream . . .

Later, not so much later, the first day
station wagon down Moody Street and banged
He jumped down before it bounced the street,

and yelled me over in a rage. Or maybe,
I remember, of punishment fine-tuned,
my ruined life, my new rights vanishing.
Hardly a threat, I know now, the feckless cop.

I gripped the steering wheel so hard
to stop the huge recalcitrant Ford, doomed
How could I think, my budding power stripped,

The souls that sleep shall wake again,

So since redemption comes through pain
He smote the earth with chastening rod,

But where His desolation trod
The people in their agony

In Barcelona, Jew; in Paris, Arab: 
Everywhere and at all times, and he fights back. 

He holds up seven thick little fingers 
In the flat brown eyes flecked with blood. 

He asks me to tell all I can remember 
In North Africa and what came after, 
The loss of his father, the loss of his brother, 

Dusted with glass, the warm smell of rye 
So strong he ate till his mouth filled with blood. 

Tells me I should never disparage 
The stiff bristles that guard the head of the fighter. 

Stiff, 116 pounds, five feet two, 

Kisses my lips, his eyes still open, 
My imaginary brother, my cousin, 
Myself made otherwise by all his pain.

We burrowed night and day with tools of lead,
Heaped the bank up and cast it in a ring
And hurled the earth above. And Caesar said,
"Why, it is excellent. I like the thing."
We, who are dead,
Made it, and wrought, and Caesar liked the thing.

And here we strove, and here we felt each vein
Ice-bound, each limb fast-frozen, all night long.
And here we held communion with the rain
That lashed us into manhood with its thong,
Cleansing through pain.
And the wind visited us and made us strong.

Up from around us, numbers without name,
Strong men and naked, vast, on either hand
Pressing us in, they came. And the wind came
And bitter rain, turning grey all the land.
That was our game,
To fight with men and storms, and it was grand.

For many days we fought them, and our sweat
Watered the grass, making it spring up green,
Blooming for us. And, if the wind was wet,
Our blood wetted the wind, making it keen
With the hatred
And wrath and courage that our blood had been.

So, fighting men and winds and tempests, hot
With joy and hate and battle-lust, we fell
Where we fought. And God said, "Killed at last then? What!
Ye that are too strong for heaven, too clean for hell,
(God said) stir not.
This be your heaven, or, if ye will, your hell."

So again we fight and wrestle, and again
Hurl the earth up and cast it in a ring.
But when the wind comes up, driving the rain
(Each rain-drop a fiery steed), and the mists rolling
Up from the plain,
This wild procession, this impetuous thing.

Hold us amazed. We mount the wind-cars, then
Whip up the steeds and drive through all the world,
Searching to find somewhere some brethren,
Sons of the winds and waters of the world.
We, who were men,
Have sought, and found no men in all this world.

Wind, that has blown here always ceaselessly,
Bringing, if any man can understand,
Might to the mighty, freedom to the free;
Wind, that has caught us, cleansed us, made us grand,
Wind that is we

That so may live and wrestle and hate that when
They fall at last exultant, as we fell,
And come to God, God may say, "Do you come then
Mildly enquiring, is it heaven or hell?
Why! Ye were men!
Back to your winds and rains. Be these your heaven and hell!"
toad who claims that change is possible,

First one, then another, until innumerable
they merge into the single voice of a summer hill.

fixed as a fencepost, hearing the steers
snort in the dark pasture, smelling the manure.

can bear to be a stone, the pain

rooted for centuries, the living wood grown tall
and thickened with a hundred thousand days of light.

The old windmill creaks in perfect time
and the last farmhouse light goes off.

these hills and packs of feral dogs.
But standing here at night accepts all that.

part of the moonlight as the moonlight falls,

Part of the grass that answers the wind,
there is no silence but when danger comes.

I called Hart on my longer distance line
Hart, I implored, I searched your book
(Yes, you have a Collected) and could fine
Nothing about the 36 cast iron bridges in
At least. He said he wrote about the narrow Bow Bridge
For peds built in 1878 which is sad and fine
And always photographed through branches in the foregrine
Which was sufficiently sad to make him weep all the tine
He was trying to write the poem so he threw it away.
He tried again and he uncontrollably wept agine.
Did you try a third tine,
Life is uncontrollably sad all the time
Unless we divert ourselves with art objects,
About this, for instance when we feel it
While looking at a photograph of the cast ine
Bow Bridge or see in life not photos but the real bridge at a short destine
Away with the actual park and branches around us,
We feel like killing ourselves to stop the pain
Or as you, Arthur, call it, the pine,
To write the poem. Get off this line,

Well, I considered calling on my second longer distance line
Kenneth who in heavine has changed his name to Kenneth Kine
And Barbara who I did call on my second longer distance line
With Hart on hold and affirmed her name change to Barbara Gine
Or whether they had discarded their own poems about the 36 cast ine
Bridges for people to walk on in Central Park
Because they were weeping on the paper and pine
I figured the next step was mine.
So if you can believe it I hung up on Hart Crine.

The sun is high, the seaside air is sharp, 
And salty light reveals the Mayan School. 
The Irish hope their names are on the harp, 
We see the sheep's advertisement for wool, 
Boulders are here, to throw against a tarp, 
From which comes bursting forth a puzzled mule. 
Perceval seizes it and mounts it, then 
The blood-dimmed tide recedes and then comes in again. 

Fateful connections that we make to things 
Whose functioning's oblivious to our lives! 
How sidewise news of light from darkness springs, 
How blue bees buzz from big blooms back to hives 
And make the honey while the queen bee sings 
How long ago I saw the misted pine trees 
And hoped, no matter how, to get them into poetry! 

Stendhal, at fifty, gazing as it happened 
On Rome from the Janiculum, decided 
That one way he could give his life a stipend 
Was to suspend his being Amour's fighter 
And get to know himself. Here he had ripened 
Accomplished, loved, and lived, was a great writer 
But never had explored in true detail 
His childhood and his growing up. So he set sail 

Composing La Vie de Henry Brulard 
But in five hundred pages scarcely got 
Beyond his seventeenth year, for it is hard 
To take into account what happens here 
And fit it all onto an index card. 
Even one moment of it is too hot, 
Complex and cannibalistically connected 
To every other, which is what might be expected. 

Sterne's hero has a greater problem, never 
Getting much past his birth. I've had a third one. 
My autobiography, if I should ever 
Start out to write it, quickly seems a burden 
An I-will-do-that-the-next-time endeavor. 
Whatever life I do write's an absurd one 
As if some crazy person with a knife 
Cut up and made a jigsaw puzzle of a life. 

In any case a life that's hardly possible 
In the conditions that we really live in, 
Where easy flying leaps to inaccessible 
Mountainy places where love is a given 
And misery, if there, infinitesimal, 
Are quite the norm. Here none by pain is driven 
That is not curable by the romanza 
That's kept in readiness to finish any stanza. 

Whatever, then, I see at this late stage of 
My life I may or may not have stayed ignorant 
Of that great book I've strained to write one page of 
Yet always hoping my page was significant. 
Be it or not, for me and for the ages 
I leave it as it is. Yet as a figurant 
Who has not stopped, I'm writing in addition 
More lines to clarify my present disposition. 

One person in a million finds out something 
Perhaps each fifty years and that is knowledge. 
Newton, Copernicus, Einstein are cunning. 
The rest of us just rise and go to college 
With no more hope to come home with the bunting 
Than a stray dachshund going through the village. 
However, what a treat our small successes 
Of present and of past, at various addresses! 

To be in all those places where I tarried 
Too little or too late or bright and early 
To love again the first woman I married 
To marvel at such things as melancholy, 
Sophistication, drums, a baby carriage, 
How my desire when young to be a poet 
Made me attentive and oblivious every moment! 

Do you remember Oceanview the Fair? 
The heights above the river? The canoes? 
The place we beached them and the grass was bare? 
Those days the sandbars gave our knees a truce? 
The crooked line of pantry shelves, with pear 
And cherry jam? And Pancho, with his noose? 
Do you remember Full and Half and Empty? 
Do you remember sorrow standing in the entry? 

Do you remember thought, and talking plainly? 
Michel and I went walking after Chartres 
Cathedral had engaged our spirits mainly 
By giving us an insight into Barthes. 
Michel said he was capable of feigning 
Renewed intentions of the soul's deep part, 
Like this cathedral's artificial forces 
That press a kind of artless thought into our faces. 

The porcupine turns over on its belly 
And new conceptions rap at the cocoon. 
Civilization, dealing with us fairly, 
For once, releases its Erectheion 
Of understanding, which consoles us, nearly. 
Later we study certain characteristics 
That may give us a better chance with the statistics. 

How much I'd like to live the whole thing over, 
But making some corrections as I go! 
To be a better husband and a father, 
Be with my babies on a sled in snow. 
By twenty I'd have understood my mother 
And by compassion found a way to know 
What separates the what-I-started-out-as 
From what-I-sometimes-wished-I-was-when-in-the-mountains. 

To be once more the one who what was worthy 
As trying to, er, as they say, give birth to 
A poem and as often unsuccessful, 
But it was nice to be sublime and flirty 
With radiant girls, and, in some strange way, restful. 
And then to get somebody else to feel it mutually! 

In poems the same problem or a similar. 
Desire of course not only to do old things 
But things unheard of yet by nuns or visitors 
And of the melancholy finch be co-finch 
In singing songs with such a broad parameter 
That seamstresses would stare, forget to sew things, 
Astronauts quit the sky, athletes the stadium 
To hear them, and the rest of what they hear be tedium. 

Such wild desires, I think it's recognizable 
Are part and parcel of the Human Image 
And in a way, I'd say, no less predictable 
Than Popeye's feelings for a can of spinach. 
Yet if we're set on course by the Invisible, 
All pre-determined, what about the language 
That teases me each morning with its leanings 
Toward the Unprogrammed Altitudes beyond its meanings? 

Are you, O particles, O atoms, nominatives 
Like Percevals and Stendhals, set in motion 
By some Ordaining Will that is definitive? 
Is this invading chill and high emotion, 
This tendency to know one is regenerative, 
Is this, all, tidal take-home like the ocean? 
Be what you may, my thanks for your society 
Through the long life I've had, your jokes and your variety, 

The warmth you've shown in giving me a temperature 
That I can live with, and the strength you've shared with me 
What can I say? It is as if life stared at me 
And kissed my lips and left it as a signature. 
Thank you for that, and thank you for preparing me 
For love itself, and friendship, its co-agent. 
Thank you for being this, and for its inspiration.

You are a friend then, as I make it out, 
Of our man Shakespeare, who alone of us 
Will put an ass's head in Fairyland 
As he would add a shilling to more shillings, 
Miraculous inviolable increase 
Fills Ilion, Rome, or any town you like 
Of olden time with timeless Englishmen; 
All you down there where your small Avon flows 
By Stratford, and where you're an Alderman. 
Some, for a guess, would have him riding back 
To be a farrier there, or say a dyer; 
Or maybe one of your adept surveyors; 
Or like enough the wizard of all tanners. 
The nimble element, the true caloric; 
I see it, and was told of it, moreover, 
By our discriminate friend himself, no other. 
Had you been one of the sad average, 
The sinew and the solvent of our Island, 
You'd not be buying beer for this Terpander's 
Approved and estimated friend Ben Jonson; 
He'd never foist it as a part of his 
Contingent entertainment of a townsman 
While he goes off rehearsing, as he must, 
If he shall ever be the Duke of Stratford. 
Far from it; for one town's as like another 
And there's the Stratford in him; he denies it, 
And there's the Shakespeare in him. So, God help him! 
I tell him he needs Greek; but neither God 
Nor Greek will help him. Nothing will help that man. 
You see the fates have given him so much, 
Of London, where he sees too many lords. 
They're part of half what ails him: I suppose 
There's nothing fouler down among the demons 
Than what it is he feels when he remembers 
The dust and sweat and ointment of his calling 
With his lords looking on and laughing at him. 
King as he is, he can't be king de facto, 
And that's as well, because he wouldn't like it; 
He'd frame a lower rating of men then 
Than he has now; and after that would come 
An abdication or an apoplexy. 
Though half the world, if not the whole of it, 
May crown him with a crown that fits no king 
Save Lord Apollo's homesick emissary: 
Not there on Avon, or on any stream 
Where Naiads and their white arms are no more, 
Shall he find home again. It's all too bad. 
The best you ever saw; and he'll be there 
Anon, as you're an Alderman. Good God! 
He makes me lie awake o'nights and laugh. 

And you have known him from his origin, 
You tell me; and a most uncommon urchin 
A trifle terrifying, I dare say, 
Discovering a world with his man's eyes, 
Quite as another lad might see some finches, 
If he looked hard and had an eye for nature. 
But this one had his eyes and their foretelling, 
And he had you to fare with, and what else? 
As a boy should, I venture; and the dog, 
Most likely, was the only man who knew him. 
A dog, for all I know, is what he needs 
As much as anything right here to-day, 
To counsel him about his disillusions, 
A dog of orders, an emeritus, 
To wag his tail at him when he comes home, 
And then to put his paws up on his knees 
And say, "For God's sake, what's it all about?" 

Or what he needs. I tell him he needs Greek; 
I'll talk of rules and Aristotle with him, 
And if his tongue's at home he'll say to that, 
I have your word that Aristotle knows, 
And you mine that I don't know Aristotle." 
He's all at odds with all the unities, 
And what's yet worse, it doesn't seem to matter; 
He treads along through Time's old wilderness 
As if the tramp of all the centuries 
And that's a pity, or I say it is. 
Going his way, the way that he goes best, 
A pleasant animal with no great noise 
Save only divers and inclement devils 
Have made of late his heart their dwelling place. 
A flame half ready to fly out sometimes 
At some annoyance may be fanned up in him, 
But soon it falls, and when it falls goes out; 
He knows how little room there is in there 
For crude and futile animosities, 
And how much for the joy of being whole, 
And how much for long sorrow and old pain. 
On our side there are some who may be given 
To grow old wondering what he thinks of us 
And some above us, who are, in his eyes, 
Yet here we smile, or disappoint the gods 
Who made it so: the gods have always eyes 
To see men scratch; and they see one down here 
Who itches, manor-bitten to the bone, 
The lord of more than England and of more 
Than all the seas of England in all time 
Shall ever wash. D'ye wonder that I laugh? 
He sees me, and he doesn't seem to care; 
And why the devil should he? I can't tell you. 

I'll meet him out alone of a bright Sunday, 
Trim, rather spruce, and quite the gentleman. 
"What ho, my lord!" say I. He doesn't hear me; 
Wherefore I have to pause and look at him. 
He's not enormous, but one looks at him. 
A little on the round if you insist, 
For now, God save the mark, he's growing old; 
He's five and forty, and to hear him talk 
These days you'd call him eighty; then you'd add 
More years to that. He's old enough to be 
The father of a world, and so he is. 
"Ben, you're a scholar, what's the time of day?" 
Says he; and there shines out of him again 
Half-mad serenity that laughs at fame 
For being won so easy, and at friends 
Who laugh at him for what he wants the most, 
By which you see we're all a little jealous ... 
 Poor Greene! I fear the color of his name 
Was even as that of his ascending soul; 
Some scrivening to the end against their fate, 
Their puppets all in ink and all to die there; 
And some with hands that once would shade an eye 
Will reach by this time for a pot-house mop 
To slush their first and last of royalties. 
Poor devils! and they all play to his hand; 
For so it was in Athens and old Rome. 
But that's not here or there; I've wandered off. 
Greene does it, or I'm careful. Where's that boy? 

Yes, he'll go back to Stratford. And we'll miss him? 
Dear sir, there'll be no London here without him. 
We'll all be riding, one of these fine days, 
And then we'll think of what he never said 
With what he did say, would buy many horses. 
Though nowadays he's not so much for women: 
"So few of them," he says, "are worth the guessing." 
But there's a worm at work when he says that, 
And while he says it one feels in the air 
A deal of circumambient hocus-pocus. 
They've had him dancing till his toes were tender, 
And he can feel 'em now, come chilly rains. 
There's no long cry for going into it, 
However, and we don't know much about it. 
But you in Stratford, like most here in London, 
Have more now in the Sonnets than you paid for; 
He's put one there with all her poison on, 
To make a singing fiction of a shadow 
That's in his life a fact, and always will be. 
But she's no care of ours, though Time, I fear, 
Will have a more reverberant ado 
About her than about another one 
Who seems to have decoyed him, married him, 
With much already learned, and more to learn, 
And more to follow. Lord! how I see him now, 
Pretending, maybe trying, to be like us. 
Whatever he may have meant, we never had him; 
We'd flayed another had he tried it on us) 
That made as many of us as had wits 
More fond of all his easy distances 
Than one another's noise and clap-your-shoulder. 
But think you not, my friend, he'd never talk! 
Thereby acquiring much we knew before 
About ourselves, and hitherto had held 
Irrelevant, or not prime to the purpose. 
And there were some, of course, and there be now, 
Disordered and reduced amazedly 
I was young once, at least, if not beautiful.
And what is beauty anyway? The light off snow
is pretty. I was young once, as young as any.
After all, she thought, to know the edge
of truth or of mountains, you need to lie or fall.

Everyone has an inner life, O careless love,
it's as simple as that. That's why they hurried
She would avert her eyes from the magazines'
special issues with brides on their creamy covers.

He worked to replace her money he'd squandered.
Then came a time of last intimacy, her injections,
when once a week he'd puncture with the silken needle
her arm, her condition worse with age, her pain
made him wince and call her Dear; her alluring allergies.

From where they retired all views were distant,
nothing true or tender at hand. Mountains to the west
like pets kept for good weather or loneliness
and the need for cold to gloat upon.
They would sometimes think of history together,

of the choked passes which killed, of the grasses of summer
when water was rare and expensive as illicit love.
With the interstate smooth as needles gleaming beneath
the snow-slick peaks, they would think of pioneers
lost and together, alas, two by two, with beds as baggage.

Another edge to be cut on. She loves the little
line of houses or trees in landscapes, the thin
horizons hugely bearing the weight of drama
and of sky with its tooth of cypress or steeple.
And he, while he turned the wheel and tuned the radio,

what was on his married mind? He remembers often,
these latter days, the cousin he first loved,
her marriage to an ugly man when he lit the candles
and wore the little suit his mother made,
and he cried for her because she was only beautiful.

He remembered riding in the car from the library,
having taken a book on Freud because his cousin
was studying Freud, and such studies were forbidden
his Catholic childhood. And riding in the back seat
as his father drove he read about the fountain pen

as phallic, the ink seed of Onan spilled, and he
grew sick and felt the frisson of guilt and glory.
And she was married to an ugly man, but the world
conspires to avert its eyes, and the needle-sharp
peaks hover behind them as the little dashes of white

lines spurt out beneath their car on the highway home,
a little line like spoor marking their path, so easy
to retrace, ready made, like everyone's. So there's
no need to look, just live long, since youth is truer
than beauty, Love; long life and many children.
Three days I heard them grieve when I lay dead, 
(It was so strange to me that they should weep!) 
Tall candles burned about me in the dark, 
And a great crucifix was on my breast, 
And a great silence filled the lonesome room. 

I heard one whisper, "Lo! the dawn is breaking, 
And he has lost the wonder of the day." 
Another came whom I had loved on earth, 
And kissed my brow and brushed my dampened hair. 
Softly she spoke: "Oh that he should not see 
The April that his spirit bathed in! Birds 
Are singing in the orchard, and the grass 
That soon will cover him is growing green. 
The daisies whiten on the emerald hills, 
And the immortal magic that he loved 
Another said: "Last night I saw the moon 
Like a tremendous lantern shine in heaven, 
And I could only think of him-and sob. 
For I remembered evenings wonderful 
When he was faint with Life's sad loveliness, 
And watched the silver ribbons wandering far 
Along the shore, and out upon the sea. 
Oh, I remembered how he loved the world, 
The sighing ocean and the flaming stars, 

-His tapestries that wrap the earth's wide room. 
I minded me of mornings filled with rain 
When he would sit and listen to the sound 
As if it were lost music from the spheres. 
He loved the crocus and the hawthorn-hedge, 
He loved the shining gold of buttercups, 
And the low droning of the drowsy bees 
That boomed across the meadows. He was glad 
At dawn or sundown; glad when Autumn came 
With her worn livery and scarlet crown, 
And glad when Winter rocked the earth to rest. 
Strange that he sleeps today when Life is young, 
And the wild banners of the Spring are blowing 
With green inscriptions of the old delight." 

I heard them whisper in the quiet room. 
And tell them of the glory that was mine. 
There was no darkness where my spirit flew, 
There was no night beyond the teeming world. 
Their April was like winter where I roamed; 
Their flowers were like stones where now I fared. 
Earth's day! it was as if I had not known 
What sunlight meant! . . Yea, even as they grieved 
For all that I had lost in their pale place, 
I swung beyond the borders of the sky, 
And floated through the clouds, myself the air, 

Myself the ether, yet a matchless being 
Whom God had snatched from penury and pain 
To draw across the barricades of heaven. 
I clomb beyond the sun, beyond the moon; 
In flight on flight I touched the highest star; 
I plunged to regions where the Spring is born, 
Myself (I asked not how) the April wind, 
Myself the elements that are of God. 
Up flowery stairways of eternity 
I whirled in wonder and untrammeled joy, 
His dream that knows no end. . . . 
I was the dawn, I was the purple east, 
I was the moonlight on enchanted nights, 
(Yet time was lost to me); I was a flower 
For one to pluck who loved me; I was bliss, 
And rapture, splendid moments of delight; 
And I was prayer, and solitude, and hope; 
And always, always, always I was love. 
I tore asunder flimsy doors of time, 
And through the windows of my soul's new sight 
I saw beyond the ultimate bounds of space. 
The very moonbeam in that quiet room, 
The very sunlight one had dreamed I lost, 
The soul of the returning April grass, 
The spirit of the evening and the dawn, 
The perfume in unnumbered hawthorn-blooms. 
There was no shadow on my perfect peace, 
No knowledge that was hidden from my heart. 
I learned what music meant; I read the years; 
I found where rainbows hide, where tears begin; 
I trod the precincts of things yet unborn. 

Yea, while I found all wisdom (being dead), 
They grieved for me. . I should have grieved for them!

And mismatch,
Without a meaning, like air in its clear nothingness.
What can we say to either of them?
They ruffle our hair,
Then stop, abruptly as wind.
Nothing is endless but the sky.
The flies come back, and the afternoon
Teeters a bit on its green edges,
________
 

Those who look for the Lord will cry out in praise of him.
Some will go wordlessly, some
Will listen their way in with their mouths
And some will revile him out of love
Rows of gravestones stay our steps,
Bright as auras around our bodies.
And some will utter the words,
Hating their garments splotched by the flesh.
These are the lucky ones, the shelved ones, the twice-erased.
________
 

Dante and John Chrysostom
Clouds sculling downsky like a narrative for whatever comes,
Still lurking behind the stars,
In the landscape,
And handle our hurt with ease.
Sky blue, blue of infinity, blue
Why do the great stories always exist in the past?
________
 

Unanswerable questions, small talk,
Of evening,
Moon half-empty, moon half-full,
Spider at work between the hedges,
Last bird call,
________
 

We go to our graves with secondary affections,
Second-hand satisfaction, half-souled,
but we harbor no ill will.
What letters will we illuminate?
Above us, the atmosphere,
Above us, the great constellations sidle and wince,
The letters undarken and come forth,
Your X and my X.
________
 

Spirit of slides and silences,
Witness and walk on.
Succor my shift and save me ...
And in the gardens and dwarf orchard.
Under the rain,
The rain fills our narrow beds.

Hunched in the bath, four ibuprofen gulped
I am just a body bleeding in bad light.

But after an hour, as the wrenching wanes, 
I run more water in, remembering

In a palm of pinkish water, I scoop up 
red to nearly black as I tilt my hand
glistening like a ruby cabochon, 
would I harbor another life now?

Last spring, I sat above the harbor in Naples 
safely back at school. Palpable, 
soccer games in the Flegrean fields,
first words, whose honeyed gravity 

Their new principal refused to pay 
rabbits and a little clutch of chicks 
someone had written across the door in blood.
That bitch is going to get our children killed.
with tits and vulvae, succulently cooked, 

She was scoured of identity. 

where it liquefies on schedule 

if some net had hauled these images 
lapels flickered yellow wicks of mimosa, 
burned on the flank of Mt. Vesuvius 

the city managed to transubstantiate 
Fireworks seethed above the bobbing masts. 
One, drunker than the others, loomed

the hematite heaviness of a final no.

five months along, it was too late, 

hauled at by tides, sleeking invasive grit 
hiding in the tub for half an hour 

Little plumes of my flesh rock in the swells, 

Drained, I need a couple hours of sleep, 
into a bay of blood-threshed water. 
below trees, at a table laid
braised and stuffed, as Apicius writes, 

Blood on the night soil man en route to the country prison
Blood on the sullen chair, the one that holds you with its pleasure

Blood inside the quartz, the beauty watch, the eye of the guard
Blood on the slope of names & the tattoos hidden

Blood on the Virgin, behind the veils,

Blood on the couch, made for viewing automobiles & face cream
Blood on the pin, this one going through you without any pain

Blood on the screen, the green torso queen of slavering hearts
Blood on the grandmother's wish, her tawdry stick of Texas

Blood on the daughter's breast who sews roses
Blood on the father, does anyone remember him, bluish?

Blood on the fender, in the sender's shoe, in his liquor sack
Blood on the street, call it Milagro Boulevard, Mercy Lanes #9
Blood on the alien, in the alligator jacket teen boy Juan

Blood driving miniature American queens stamped into rage
Blood driving rappers in Mercedes blackened & whitened in news
Blood driving the snare-eyed professor searching for her panties
Blood driving the championship husband bent in Extreme Unction

Blood of the painted donkey forced into prostitute zebra,
Blood of the Tijuana tourist finally awake & forced into pimp sleep again

It is blood time, Sir Terminator says,
It is blood time, Sir Simpson winks,
It is blood time, Sir McVeigh weighs.

Blood in the language, in the wise text of the market sausage
Blood in the border web, the penal colony shed, in the bilingual yard

Who will eat this speckled corn?
Who shall be born on this Wednesday war bed?

Blood in the acid theater, again, in the box office smash hit
Blood in the Corvette tank, in the crack talk crank below

Blood boat Navy blood glove Army ventricle Marines
Roam & rumble, investigate my Mexican hoodlum blood

Blood in the Groove Shopping Center,
In blue Appalachia river, in Detroit harness spleen

Blood in the Groove Virus machine,
In low ocean tide, in Iowa soy bean

Blood in the Groove Lynch mob orchestra,
South of Herzegovina, south, I said

Blood marching for the Immigration Patrol, prized & arrogant
Blood spawning in the dawn break of African Blood Tribes, grimacing

Blood on the Macho Hat, the one used for proper genuflections
Blood on the faithful knee, the one readied for erotic negation
Blood on the willing nerve terminal, the one open for suicide

Blood at the age of seventeen
Blood at the age of one, dumped in a Greyhound bus

Blood mute & autistic & cauterized & smuggled Mayan
& burned in border smelter tar

Africans in the hold fold themselves
ferocity, tar, grouting the planks like the glue

Distilled from evaporating brine, salt
dusts the floor, tickling with the measure
into time and the thirst trapped below.

They stand, computing the swim back to land.
But we do not hang ourselves in cowardice.

Sold six times on the journey to the coast,
once for a gun, then cloth, then iron
manilas, her pride was masticated like husks
of chewing sticks, spat from morning-rank mouths.

Breaking loose, edge of handcuffs held high
like the blade of a vengeful axe, she runs
across the salt scratch of deck,
pain deeper than the blue inside a flame.

The sound, like the break of bone
or the musket shot dropping her
over the side, her chains wrapped
around his neck in dance.

I met a courtier riding on the plain,
 Well-mounted on a brave and gallant steed;
 I sat upon a jade, and spurred to my pain 
 My lazy beast, whose tired sides did bleed:
 He saw my case, and then of courtesy
 Did rein his horse, and drew the bridle in,
 Because I did desire his company:
 But he corvetting way of me did win. 

Like newlyweds,
my parents slip out of their clothes.
He puts aside the sweater I chose
for him, she undoes her pearls.
They rise up from their old ailments,
their fears of falling, broken hips
and other bad news.
barefoot in their living room,
go bowling on a whim.
They garden all day without pain,
calling out like songbirds,
like dolls and their sleepless eyes
glide closed. They seem so eager
for morning, I pray they will find each other

Shoulders knobbed against  
a slat-backed chair,  
the temples tugged, a pull 

at the nape, you felt the up- 
sweep as she smoothed the fine  
wisps back and tucked 

yank into yank 
and a third into that  
until the consecutive 

dodges of thumbs and first  
fingers gathered,  
fraying and filing 

in an ornament that, suspended,  
looked ridiculous, even 

on a child who mostly  
set forth with  
what was called 

loose ends in order where  
others were not 

and a slight weight below  
others had of it 

was invisible to you. 
It made something there  
where there would have been 

a kind of face  
sent from woman to 

woman like a duty,  
an obstinate  
duty to pattern. 

one thing rather  
than another, a wish 

suppressed, a vise that holds  
a thought in its proper 

place until it bobs  
to the surface 
of a generally balmy 

sea. Women and  
woman only a letter  

mixed, then mixed  
right out of the heaven  
of perfect fit; 

one kind of accident  
turns into another. 
The whole head throbs for days. 

Black and white are woven  
into gray the way  
hyperbole has no chance 

just a thread among 

the available options  
and hope itself apparent  
there in the very 

notion a made thing can last.  
Tougher, coarser, split  
weave in the years. Shorter, 

longer, shorter, the brain  
bound to its anchor.  
The brushed-out waves 

with their rick-rack  
shadows, a thread  
inside the case, 

the case inside 
the locket, the locket  
beneath the yoke. 

All the effort  
to save in itself  
a form of loss. 

You can tell a story 
many ways. You can leave  
something out or put 

something in; you can fool  
yourself and hide.  
You can shake out 

the form or try 
to manage every wisp,  
but the latter will 

only bring you pain.  
You went under 
the hand and eye of another 

and the tether cannot  
be undone. 

4
in my own defense

what could I choose
but to slide along behind them,
they whose only sin
as they stood with their backs
to the garden,
a new and terrible luster
burning their eyes,
only You could have called
their ineffable names,
only in their fever
could they have failed to hear.

5
the road led from delight

into delight. into the sharp
edge of seasons, into the sweet
puff of bread baking, the warm
vale of sheet and sweat after love,
the tinny newborn cry of calf
and cormorant and humankind.
and pain, of course,
always there was some bleeding,
but forbid me not
my meditation on the outer world
before the rest of it, before
the bruising of his heel, my head,
and so forth.

6

tell me, tell us why
in the confusion of a mountain
of babies stacked like cordwood,
of limbs walking away from each other,
of tongues bitten through
by the language of assault,
tell me, tell us why
You neither raised your hand
Nor turned away, tell us why
You watched the excommunication of
That world and You said nothing.

7
still there is mercy, there is grace

how otherwise
could I have come to this
marble spinning in space
propelled by the great
thumb of the universe?
how otherwise
could the two roads
of this tongue
converge into a single
certitude?
how otherwise
could I, a sleek old
traveler,
curl one day safe and still
beside YOU
at Your feet, perhaps,
but, amen, Yours.

8

so.
having no need to speak
You sent Your tongue
splintered into angels.
even i,
with my little piece of it
have said too much.
to ask You to explain
is to deny You.
before the word
You were.
You kiss my brother mouth.
the rest is silence.

They walk past you
You old fortune-teller,
you could have told them
in their vibrant grief
whispering through the night wind
your breath held in your heart
like the trembling promise of tomorrow,
just before dawn

I. The Exodus. (August 3, 1492.)
II. Treasures.
III. The Sower.
IV. The Test.
V. Currents.
VI. The Prophet.
VII. Chrysalis.
if you insist on going your way,

That is what cowards say, and realists
who run away, shun the appeal its

though where the oldest story goes is

whereof mouth cannot speak, it kisses;
hop to it, man, and realize this is

Rilke and George in hospital beds presumably, in Switzerland,
rested on white pillows 
all of it junk now, or no longer extant,
unattributable, anonymous
in its insentient and continual disintegration.

We bear within us the seeds of all the gods, 
who separated them, the words and things,
who blended them, the torments and the place where they come to an end, 
the few boards and the floods of tears,
home for a few wretched hours.

Can be no sorrow. Too distant, too remote, 
bed and tears too impalpable,
no No, no Yes,
birth and bodily pain and faith 
an undefinable surge, a lurch,
a power stirring in its sleep
sleep well!

Moonpoison, mullock of sacrifice,
Suffuses the veins of the eyes
Till the retina, mooncoloured,
Sees the sideways motion of the cretin crab
Hued thus like a tortoise askew in the glaucous moonscape
A flat hot boulder it
Lividly in the midst of the Doldrums
Sidles
The lunatic unable to bear the silent course of constellations
Mad and stark naked
Sidles
The obol on an eyeball of a man dead from elphantiasis
Sidles
All three across heaven with a rocking motion.
The Doldrums: 'region of calms and light baffling winds near Equator.'
But the calms are rare
The winds baffling but not light
And the drunken boats belonging to the Crab Club
Rock hot and naked to the dunning of the moon
All in the pallescent Sargasso weed
And windbound, seeking distraction by the light of deliverance
For
What are we but the excrement of non-existent noon?
What are we all but 'burial grounds abhorred by the moon'?
And did the Maoris die of measles? So do we.

But there is no snow here, nor lilies.
The night is glutinous
In a broad hearth crisscross thorn clumps
Smoulder: distant fireback of copse
Throws back silence: glassen ashes gleam in pond
The constellations which have stopped working (?)
Shimmer. No dead leaf jumps.
On edge of lawn a glowworm
Hangs out its state-recognized torchlamp
Blocks of flowers gape dumb as windows with blinds drawn
And in the centre the rugate trees
Though seeming as if they go up in smoke
Are held like cardboard where they are.
Bluehot it is queer fuel to make the moon move.

Agesias said: 'Nero was an artist because he murdered his mother
Sensibility (subliminal) is of more importance than moral obligation
Epinondas said: 'I have been a liar, now no longer so.'
Zeuxias said: 'What I have always been, I shall remain, a fool."
Epator was drunk for two days: Theodorus traced his disease to college,
And so down the Alphabet, ate, and the Persian,
With variegated gutterals and sibilants, the Gaelic with dipthongs and
Choctaw with three different clicks
Each letter is somebody
But the Crab is nobody
Nobody
Nobody
A ganglion of neurotic imitations
Composed of each letter in turn
Jointed by conflicts he does not want
A word that never existed with a sense nobody can understand.
Suffering for the sins his father refuse to commit
He sits and thinks about the twiddling toes of Gunerita
A boy-girl or girl-boy of an average pulchritude
Haunted by phantoms of his female self
Whom he has never seen but composed himself, thus:
This he desires, but despises:
Bhah!
Always sideways, crabs walk.

Either he is not fit for this world
Or this world not fit for him. But which?
After all this pain of development is there neither interval nor reward?
They lured him with promises,
Now it has all slipped sideways
What is the good, I ask you, of going into a melting-pot
If fated to melt again after getting out of it?
The answers are: He is not out of it
Determined to budge not from yon slippery rock
Not a yard, no, not an inch, no, nor a barleycorn's breadth
For chance is not blind but unimpedable
And we call it blind because
Since we frustrate it only by chance
We prefer to shut our own eyes.

The crab however crawls on.

He must therefore be a crab subnormal.
One day, one of his foreclaws, assembled as usual by many men,
Being longer than the other, turns and pinches his tentacles
With the other he pinches the persons that assembled the long one
Next day the short one, equally alien, is the longer
And the process is reversed.
In mass production one hand never knows
The evil the other is inspiring it to do
This is a heretic even to the faiths he fails to believe
So worthless, awkward, unintelligible,
The crab crawls on.

He has sufferd because he was ugly
Let him be cruel now that he is attractive
Caring not whether he fructifies cruelty or is merely hard on self.
We trap our goldfinch trapping out souls therewinged
Sacrifice our mad gods to the madder gods:
We hymn the two sons of Leda and Zeus Aegis-bearer
We don't. We drink and drivel. My

How can I be hardened when the whole world is fluid?
Corn blue-bloom-covered carpeting the wind
Wind humming like distant rooks
Distant rooks busy like factory whirring metal
Whirring metallic starlings bizarre like cogwheels missing teeth
These last grinning like the backs of old motor cars
Old motor cars smelling of tragomaschality
Tragomaschality denoting the triumph of self over civilization
Civilization being relative our to Greek
Chinese politely making borborygms to show satisfaction
Satisfaction a matter of capacity
Capacity not significance: otherwise with an epigram
Strabismus being as common spiritually as optically the moon
The moon tramping regular steps like a policeman past the houses of the
And the Zodiac itself, whirling and flaming sideways
Circling from no point returning through no point
Endlessly skidding as long as man skids, though never moving,

Is there nothing more soluble, more gaseous, more imperceptible?
Nothing.

For the gondolas cost too much, that year,
And the lit cross-beams, that year, in the Morosini,
Bright gods and Tuscan, back before dew was shed.
Light: and the first light, before ever dew was fallen.
Panisks, and from the oak, dryas,
Through all the wood, and the leaves are full of voices,
A-whisper, and the clouds bowe over the lake,
And there are gods upon them,
And in the water, the almond-white swimmers,
The silvery water glazes the upturned nipple,
Green veins in the turquoise,
Or, the gray steps lead up under the cedars.
My Cid rode up to Burgos,
Up to the studded gate between two towers,
Beat with his lance butt, and the child came out,
To the little gallery over the gate, between the towers,
Reading the writ, voce tinnula:
That no man speak to, feed, help Ruy Diaz,
On pain to have his heart out, set on a pike spike
And both his eyes torn out, and all his goods sequestered,
And he came down from Bivar, Myo Cid,
With no hawks left there on their perches,
And no clothes there in the presses,
And left his trunk with Raquel and Vidas,
That big box of sand, with the pawn-brokers,
To get pay for his menie;
Breaking his way to Valencia.
Ignez de Castro murdered, and a wall
Here stripped, here made to stand.
Drear waste, the pigment flakes from the stone,
Or plaster flakes, Mantegna painted the wall.

Supervises over the teatable our voluble hostess
The passing round of titterings and toasties.
Her glass-eyed friends, confidence's make-and-breaks,
Give each in series gobbets of another's cakes.
Dough drips into their tight triangular shoes.
Their mouths give vent to evil-smelling news
Keep their minds pure, make mental products crisper,
With speaking eyeball rolls and the not too improper whisper.
Fawn-eyed, the daughter, a gossip apprentice,
Festoons gilt malice on her unmalicious twenties.
Holiday smarmed the manureminded ephebus
Sees in every skirt lubricity's rebus.
To whom they genuflect whenever they enjoy their shocks.
A little of everything, is the note they strike,
The only limitation, what they think they do not like.
Always they suffer inexpressible injustices,
Making their own beds, these amateur Procrusteses,
But expect their maids to lie in them. The middle classes
Must have some defence against the vulgar masses.
They have no use for idle gossips that scarify:
But in their own leisure get together to verify
Rumours of rationalists, use of contraceptives,
Probable bastards, hope of their proving defectives
(Details being perquisites of good detectives).
This of course for the parish's sake. These long nose weevils
Seek knowledge of others', as expression of their own, evils:
And naught escapes being twisted and messed,
Their own souls included, on matters of interest.
Ignorant, superficial, malignant, self-deceived,
Ashamed to bear, but proud to be bereaved,
Lip-honouring peace, by their indignant whispers
Others they desecrate, their own insure, in their smug vespers.
At mattins for their own sins pray to be forgiven,
Revelling in others while walking home from heaven.
Martrylike suffer for transgressions of the parish,
Or say they do, particularly the most garish.
But humbly at their bedside never hope that Jesus has destroyed
Others' misfortunes wholly, lest themselves be unemployed.
Such and so balsting are their faded Joys
Which Time, nor Sickness, never quite destroys.

Balder and balder every haircut
Cutting a caper as lewd as he dare cut,
Quasiphilosophically Capricorn carouses
Ill at ease in such respectable houses,
The disinherited soul of an atrabilious
Semi self-deprecating paterfamilias.
With many eyeglitters at women's legs in stockings
with metaphysical justification as Dionysiac,
And ungenteel jokes undoubtedly due to his strabismus
Distorting even the quaint festivities of Christmas.
Remembering in the artificial afternoon
Old days when Pan his saxophonic tune
Under the ilex played, and how the figwood image
Nimbly swayed in the nights of lustful scrimmage,
And how in pleased surprise he uttered several Eurekas
At finding the gross fungus Ithyphallus Impudicus.
With him his father's hair his father's scalp reveals
Commensurate, with scratching too much during silent meals,
With virgin's blood the holly on the wall
Drips. As from Druid branches fail to fall
Light, intense pearl juices from alabaster fitting,
The proper tight-drawn hostess cuts unwitting
Symbols of fertility from Christmas cake. All jollity
Is fastened down. Only innocent frivolity
Saturnalia is allowed in houses of good quality.

Tiddledywog. Meh, meh. The door bursts open wide
The Sunday china stands up horrified.
Tiddledywog. Meh, meh. All he has ever remembered
Bulges out like a plaster panel badly distempered.
Tiddledywog. Meh, membrum caprinum erexit:
Culpabat, alia aliam, quia ipsa conspexit.
First he puts under the mat Persian cat and Pekinese dog.
Then the tables' and chairbacks' torselling
Smashes, and piles on potsherds of Worcester porcelain.
Dancing about he grips the frightened flapper's
Flaxen coils, throws to the ground and violates her.
Which done she becomes he: he hates her,
And turning on the boy, knocks his eyes out,
Strips him, and using sinewy tail as a knout
Flogs the boy till he eddies and faints. And the mother faints,
Whom Capricorn props up upon the chintz
And bathing her forehead with cold milk and tea
Reverses coldness that used to be.
But when she recovers, recovers himself and batters
The woman to death. This seems to mend matters.
Next pausing somewhat incommoded by his toils,
The carpets, cushions, colour schemes he soils.
Last in fierce memory of dislocate desire
The house itself he dislocates with fire.
Scatters the redhot imitation coals
Over this mortuary of human souls.
The imitation furniture goes up in smoke
And well fired china serves as admirable coke.
Like wood distilled that dribbles clammily
Oozes the ectoplasm of his burning family.
Various vermicular disseminations
Germinating from his character's past emanations,
Wriggle until he tramples them. This action
Causes him an electric satisfaction.
But as he leaves the drawing-room for the servants' hall
To seize the housemaid ere the whole place fall
He, bleating with dismay, or recognition rather,
Finds himself facing himself as his own father.
Incestuous terror tempts him to do patricide:
But this he cannot, lest it turn out suicide:
So forfeiting this chance of lovely pain,
Since man once killed can not have joy of killing self again,
And since the air is gradually overheating,
With slight discomfort in his merry bleating,
He leaves the house to meditate, quite decent, in the Park.

Attend the coda. Hardly out he passes
Ere the charred, smashed, cadaverous wilting masses,
Shape back to chintz and gilded wood and scones.
The ancient house of Capricorn & Sons
Stands unassailable in statu quo,
Unconscious of the wiles of wurrico.
Immaculate the virgin hopes her stare
Has an enlightened but offended air:
The boy unscarred eyes still the cakes and knees
Smiling as sticky as the things he sees:
The hostess volubly goes prattling on
Deadly and regular as Gatling gun:
With spurious teeth and with triangular feet
The friends tread on each other's corns and eat:
While Capricorn, morose from losing od,
Defends the Empire and the Will of God.

When you show yourself to the woman 

is not fear, itself. You have never been good,
but now you are so good,

who are you? Is it the liquidity of her skin
that bathes the world for you,

or her face, captured like a she-lion
in your own flesh?

This summerbed is soft with ring upon ring 
upon ring of wedding, the kind

with no contract,

the kind in which the gold is only (only!) light. 
Cloud covers and lifts, 

big fire laughs at a terrible burn, 

but only (only!) because pain absorbs excess 

I know him, that man 
walking- toward me up the crowded street 
of the city, I have lived with him 
seven years now, I know his fast stride, 
deep in his jacket pockets, hands 
that have known my body, touched 
his eyes closed and opened, I have studied 
like mine, human and sad, 
but different, too, his private pain 
when it was just a few hours ago, 
what to say next.

That every man in arms should wish to be?
Among the tasks of real life, hath wrought
Upon the plan that pleased his boyish thought:
Whose high endeavours are an inward light
That makes the path before him always bright;
Who, with a natural instinct to discern
What knowledge can perform, is diligent to learn;
Abides by this resolve, and stops not there,
But makes his moral being his prime care;
Who, doomed to go in company with Pain,
And Fear, and Bloodshed, miserable train!
Turns his necessity to glorious gain;
In face of these doth exercise a power
Which is our human nature's highest dower:
Controls them and subdues, transmutes, bereaves
Of their bad influence, and their good receives:
By objects, which might force the soul to abate
Her feeling, rendered more compassionate;
So often that demand such sacrifice;
More skilful in self-knowledge, even more pure,
As tempted more; more able to endure,
As more exposed to suffering and distress;
Thence, also, more alive to tenderness.
Upon that law as on the best of friends;
Whence, in a state where men are tempted still
To evil for a guard against worse ill,
And what in quality or act is best
Doth seldom on a right foundation rest,
He labours good on good to fix, and owes
To virtue every triumph that he knows:
Rises by open means; and there will stand
On honourable terms, or else retire,
And in himself possess his own desire;
Who comprehends his trust, and to the same
Keeps faithful with a singleness of aim;
And therefore does not stoop, nor lie in wait
For wealth, or honours, or for worldly state;
Whom they must follow; on whose head must fall,
Like showers of manna, if they come at all:
Whose powers shed round him in the common strife,
Or mild concerns of ordinary life,
A constant influence, a peculiar grace;
But who, if he be called upon to face
Some awful moment to which Heaven has joined
Great issues, good or bad for human kind,
Is happy as a Lover; and attired
With sudden brightness, like a Man inspired;
And, through the heat of conflict, keeps the law
In calmness made, and sees what he foresaw;
Or if an unexpected call succeed,
Come when it will, is equal to the need:
And faculty for storm and turbulence,
Is yet a Soul whose master-bias leans
To homefelt pleasures and to gentle scenes;
Sweet images! which, wheresoe'er he be,
Are at his heart; and such fidelity
It is his darling passion to approve;
'Tis, finally, the Man, who, lifted high,
Conspicuous object in a Nation's eye,
Who, with a toward or untoward lot,
Plays, in the many games of life, that one
Where what he most doth value must be won:
Whom neither shape or danger can dismay,
Nor thought of tender happiness betray;
Who, not content that former worth stand fast,
Looks forward, persevering to the last,
From well to better, daily self-surpast:
Who, whether praise of him must walk the earth
For ever, and to noble deeds give birth,
Or he must fall, to sleep without his fame,
Finds comfort in himself and in his cause;
And, while the mortal mist is gathering, draws
His breath in confidence of Heaven's applause:
This is the happy Warrior; this is he
That every man in arms should wish to be.

We have the whole evening ahead of us,
We think, our eyesight starting to weaken,
We must have missed the houselights growing dim,
But how could that moment have escaped us when
The roots of the paper trees struck water
This nervous wood at the edge of a small,
Provincial town whose still lifes waken
And subject to the risk of animation?

The gradual reduction of Roman columns,
The disease of too many lakes and clouds.
Do cobblestones have a future? Is rain
Removable? Depressing mornings find
Characters in bed who have no reason
To get up, the light a yellowish half-light
Mirroring the mind, its sad affections.

At the lake, a flat of faultless summer
Is being taken down, the view abandoned;
The puzzled players change their places. Once
You might have found them walking in an orchard,
The blossoms opening their mouths to speak
And song occurring as if it were natural;
Now that trees uproot themselves and bankrupt
Agriculture wanes in its drying furrows,
Property and battlefields turn out to share

How simply the sun goes out like a match!
How deeply the wounds stay on the surface!
He said the best that can be said for property:
It lets an old man fall in love with landscape,
Lets so many trees have a chance to be noticed,
Allows the self-interested birds to preen,
Until the property is lost again.

To an upstart creditor who sells the trees
For lumber, then, to the sounds of saws,
Tramps through the hallway in his dirty boots
To explain, in tears, the dreary motivation:
With a boor . . . The Babel of trouble starts;
Among all the hells that go on talking,
Only one is real, though it is silent,
The land, to lose the very ground you stand on.

If the temporary brilliancies gather once more
In the middle distance, and the modal lark
Persuades the summer evening to reveal
One private little splendor not for sale,
Still, a gunshot, onstage or off,
Tells us what no one is prepared to know:
Love is a tourniquet tightening its bands
Around the slowly dying wrist of freedom,
A book of household accounts forever.

Bathed in the acid of truth, all things
Become possible: to be a cold snake
At an interview, to live on scraps of soap
To keep oneself warm, to resemble a cat
Constantly stalking the shadow of nothing,
Or the sound of a guitar from a neighboring room,
The doctor, with a smile, asks, What is man?
A hero about to be done-in for good?
A villain about to be rescued by pain?

The governess is wearing her old forage cap.
Astrov is talking about trees. We could be
Racing the wolves at thirty below
In a ravine whiplashed by snow, or slowly
Succumbing to boredom in a seaside town,
Waiting for a future that will never be,
The heat getting worse, far off the waves
Pounding faintly late in the moonlight,
At a low moment in our lives.

1.
 some things, I knew,
my children aborted, my poetry breathless forever.
2.
torn asunder permanently, drugged, numbed.
 some things I once believed in
choosing is a choice unavailable to me.

1
Who will honor the city without a name
If so many are dead and others pan gold
Or sell arms in faraway countries?

What shepherd's horn swathed in the bark of birch
Vagabonds, Pathfinders, brethren of a dissolved lodge?

This spring, in a desert, beyond a campsite flagpole,
I heard in a gray bush the buzzing of wild bees.

The current carried an echo and the timber of rafts.
A man in a visored cap and a woman in a kerchief
Pushed hard with their four hands at a heavy steering oar.

In the library, below a tower painted with the signs of the zodiac,
Kontrym would take a whiff from his snuffbox and smile
For despite Metternich all was not yet lost.

And on crooked lanes down the middle of a sandy highway
Jewish carts went their way while a black grouse hooted

2
In Death Valley I thought about styles of hairdo,
About a hand that shifted spotlights at the Student's Ball
In the city from which no voice could reach me.
Minerals did not sound the last trumpet.
There was only the rustle of a loosened grain of lava.

In Death Valley salt gleams from a dried-up lake bed.
Defend, defend yourself, says the tick-tock of the blood.
From the futility of solid rock, no wisdom.

In Death Valley no hawk or eagle against the sky.
The prediction of a Gypsy woman has come true.
In a lane under an arcade, then, I was reading a poem
Of someone who had lived next door, entitled "An Hour of Thought."

I looked long at the rearview mirror: there, the one man
Within three miles, an Indian, was walking a bicycle uphill.

3
With flutes, with torches
And a drum, boom, boom,
Look, the one who died in Istanbul, there, in the first row.
He walks arm in arm with his young lady,
And over them swallows fly.

They carry oars or staffs garlanded with leaves
And bunches of flowers from the shores of the Green Lakes,
As they came closer and closer, down Castle Street.
And then suddenly nothing, only a white puff of cloud
Over the Humanities Student Club,
Division of Creative Writing.

4
Books, we have written a whole library of them.
Lands, we have visited a great many of them.
Battles, we have lost a number of them.
Till we are no more, we and our Maryla.

5
Understanding and pity,
We value them highly.
What else?

Beauty and kisses,
Fame and its prizes,
Who cares?

Doctors and lawyers,
Well-turned-out majors,
Six feet of earth.

Rings, furs, and lashes,
Glances at Masses,
Rest in peace.

Sweet twin breasts, good night.
Sleep through to the light,
Without spiders.

6
The sun goes down above the Zealous Lithuanian Lodge
And kindles fire on landscapes "made from nature":
The valets had already brought in Theban candelabra
And pulled curtains, one after the other, slowly,
While, thinking I entered first, taking off my gloves,
I saw that all the eyes were fixed on me.

7
When I got rid of grieving
And the glory I was seeking,
Which I had no business doing,

I was carried by dragons
Over countries, bays, and mountains,
By fate, or by what happens.

Oh yes, I wanted to be me.
I toasted mirrors weepily
And learned my own stupidity.

From nails, mucous membrane,
Lungs, liver, bowels, and spleen
Whose house is made? Mine.

So what else is new?
I am not my own friend.
Time cuts me in two.

Monuments covered with snow,
Accept my gift. I wandered;
And where, I don't know.

8
Absent, burning, acrid, salty, sharp.
Thus the feast of Insubstantiality.
Under a gathering of clouds anywhere.
In a bay, on a plateau, in a dry arroyo.
No density. No harness of stone.
Even the Summa thins into straw and smoke.
And the angelic choirs fly over in a pomegranate seed
Sounding every few instants, not for us, their trumpets.

9
Light, universal, and yet it keeps changing.
For I love the light too, perhaps the light only.
Yet what is too dazzling and too high is not for me.
So when the clouds turn rosy, I think of light that is level
In the lands of birch and pine coated with crispy lichen,
Late in autumn, under the hoarfrost when the last milk caps
Rot under the firs and the hounds' barking echoes,
And jackdaws wheel over the tower of a Basilian church.

10
Unexpressed, untold.
But how?
The shortness of life,
the years quicker and quicker,
not remembering whether it happened in this or that autumn.
Retinues of homespun velveteen skirts,
giggles above a railing, pigtails askew,
sittings on chamberpots upstairs
when the sledge jingles under the columns of the porch
just before the moustachioed ones in wolf fur enter.
Female humanity,
children's snots, legs spread apart,
snarled hair, the milk boiling over,
And those centuries,
conceiving in the herring smell of the middle of the night
instead of playing something like a game of chess
or dancing an intellectual ballet.
And palisades,
and pregnant sheep,
and cows cured by incantations.

11
Not the Last Judgment, just a kermess by a river.
Small whistles, clay chickens, candied hearts.
So we trudged through the slush of melting snow
To buy bagels from the district of Smorgonie.

A fortune-teller hawking: "Your destiny, your planets."
And a toy devil bobbing in a tube of crimson brine.
Another, a rubber one, expired in the air squeaking,
By the stand where you bought stories of King Otto and Melusine.

12
Why should that city, defenseless and pure as the wedding necklace of
a forgotten tribe, keep offering itself to me?
Like blue and red-brown seeds beaded in Tuzigoot in the copper desert
seven centuries ago.

Where ocher rubbed into stone still waits for the brow and cheekbone
it would adorn, though for all that time there has been no one.

What evil in me, what pity has made me deserve this offering?

It stands before me, ready, not even the smoke from one chimney is
lacking, not one echo, when I step across the rivers that separate us.

inside Arizona, because except fo me no one else knows that they ever
lived.

They trot before me on Embankment Street, two hently born parakeets
from Samogitia, and at night they unravel their spinster tresses of gray
hair.

Here there is no earlier and no later; the seasons of the year and of the
day are simultaneous.

at the gate collect the turnpike toll in leather bags.

Rattling their wheels, "Courier" and "Speedy" move against the current
to Werki, and an oarsman shot down over England skiffs past, spread-
eagled by his oars.

At St. Peter and Paul's the angels lower their thick eyelids in a smile
over a nun who has indecent thoughts.

Bearded, in a wig, Mrs. Sora Klok sits at the counter, instructing her
twelve shopgirls.

And all of German Street tosses into the air unfurled bolts of fabric,
preparing itself for death and the conquest of Jerusalem.

Black and princely, an underground river knocks at cellars of the
cathedral under the tomb of St. Casimir the Young and under the
half-charred oak logs in the hearth.

Carrying her servant's-basket on her shoulder, Barbara, dressed in
mourning, returns from the Lithuanian Mass at St. Nicholas to the
Romers' house in Bakszta Street.

How it glitters! the snow on Three Crosses Hill and Bekiesz Hill, not
to be melted by the breath of these brief lives.

And what do I know now, when I turn into Arsenal Street and open
my eyes once more on a useless end of the world?

I was running, as the silks rustled, through room after room without
stopping, for I believed in the existence of a last door.

But the shape of lips and an apple and a flower pinned to a dress were
all that one was permitted to know and take away.

The Earth, neither compassionate nor evil, neither beautiful nor atro-
cious, persisted, innocent, open to pain and desire.

And the gift was useless, if, later on, in the flarings of distant nights,
there was not less bitterness but more.

If I cannot so exhaust my life and their life that the bygone crying is
transformed, at last, into harmony.

put to rest forever between two familiar names.

The castle tower above the leafy tumulus grows small and there is still

In the immobile light I move my lips and perhaps I am even glad not
to find the desired word.

Berkeley, 1968

O happy dames, that may embrace
The fruit of your delight,
Help to bewail the woeful case
And eke the heavy plight
Of me, that wonted to rejoice
The fortune of my pleasant choice;
Good ladies, help to fill my mourning voice.

In ship, freight with remembrance
Of thoughts and pleasures past,
He sails that hath in governance
My life while it will last;
With scalding sighs, for lack of gale,
Furthering his hope, that is his sail,
Toward me, the sweet port of his avail.

Alas! how oft in dreams I see
Those eyes that were my food;
Which sometime so delighted me,
That yet they do me good;
Wherewith I wake with his return,
Whose absent flame did make me burn:
But when I find the lack, Lord, how I mourn!

When other lovers in arms across
Rejoice their chief delight.
Drowned in tears, to mourn my loss
I stand the bitter night
In my window, where I may see
Before the winds how the clouds flee.
Lo! what a mariner love hath made of me!

And in green waves when the salt flood
Doth rise by rage of wind,
A thousand fancies in that mood
Assail my restless mind.
Alas! now drencheth my sweet foe,
That with the spoil of my heart did go,
And left me; but, alas! why did he so?

And when the seas wax calm again
To chase fro me annoy,
My doubtful hope doth cause me pain;
So dread cuts off my joy.
Thus is my wealth mingled with woe,
And of each thought a doubt doth grow;

All things belie me, I think, but I
look at them though. Well boys, at
the date today? Until something. What?
Of the lady of the whitening blow.
diamond flow through. Humble
flannel skeleton. Grin, laugh unbecoming
Living at the bottom of the water may
have been obvious all the time. But
of a child, paw of an animal. Paint
it red & make a pawprint in the psalter.
Protect her & give her back her hat
Entangle her dreams in demotic and
Warm her feet; cheat the judge
& protect the tree from which he was carved.

Jesus my frame hurts, you say.
medlars & briars. Hand me that piece of
not what I do, in the mountains I call home
nothing more than temperament born
of a custom involving a circuitous journey
This is all wrong. It rains today, my
country, already being ten.

And if to withstand this nocturnal pollution of the tiny
wanton stars with bent hook clauses of misprision
Hey a pretty honey come a listen to me
while I evening, darling, your messages,
what would you think then? But I
who write poems. When she writes them,
been to see the doctor & you have to have shots
for it. 17 balls of yarn & a sewing machine.

want to write like that. I should never
have had to do it. We were used to this

Mist clogs the sunshine. 
Smoky dwarf houses 
Hem me round everywhere; 
A vague dejection 
Weighs down my soul. 

Yet, while I languish, 
Everywhere countless 
Prospects unroll themselves, 
And countless beings 
Pass countless moods. 

Far hence, in Asia, 
On the smooth convent-roofs, 
On the gilt terraces, 
Of holy Lassa, 
Bright shines the sun. 

Grey time-worn marbles 
Hold the pure Muses; 
In their cool gallery, 
By yellow Tiber, 
They still look fair. 

Strange unloved uproar 
Shrills round their portal; 
Yet not on Helicon 
Kept they more cloudless 
Their noble calm. 

Through sun-proof alleys 
In a lone, sand-hemm'd 
City of Africa, 
A blind, led beggar, 
Age-bow'd, asks alms. 

No bolder robber 
Erst abode ambush'd 
Deep in the sandy waste; 
No clearer eyesight 
Spied prey afar. 

Saharan sand-winds 
Sear'd his keen eyeballs; 
Spent is the spoil he won. 
For him the present 
Holds only pain. 

Two young, fair lovers, 
Where the warm June-wind, 
Fresh from the summer fields 
Plays fondly round them, 
Stand, tranced in joy. 

With sweet, join'd voices, 
And with eyes brimming: 
"Ah," they cry, "Destiny, 
Prolong the present! 
Time, stand still here!" 

The prompt stern Goddess 
Shakes her head, frowning; 
Time gives his hour-glass 
Its due reversal; 
Their hour is gone. 

With weak indulgence 
Did the just Goddess 
Lengthen their happiness, 
She lengthen'd also 
Distress elsewhere. 

The hour, whose happy 
Unalloy'd moments 
I would eternalise, 
Ten thousand mourners 
Well pleased see end. 

The bleak, stern hour, 
Whose severe moments 
I would annihilate, 
Is pass'd by others 
In warmth, light, joy. 

Time, so complain'd of, 
Who to no one man 
Shows partiality, 
Brings round to all men 
Some undimm'd hours. 

I cannot change, as others do,
      Though you unjustly scorn;
    Since that poor swain, that sighs for you
      For you alone was born.
    No, Phyllis, no, your heart to move
    And to revenge my slighted love,
Will still love on, will still love on, and die.

      And you to mind shall call
    The sighs that now unpitied rise;
      The tears that vainly fall:
    That welcome hour that ends this smart,
      Will then begin your pain;
    For such a faithful, tender heart
Can never break, can never break in vain.

But how choose the appropriate sticking point to start at?
Who wants to write a poem without the letter e,
Especially for Thee, where the flourished vowel lends such panache to your carnet de bal

Where the respectable truth of tautology leaves ambiguous beauty standing by
Waiting to take off her clothes, if, that is, her percentage of body fat
Permits it (a statement implicitly unfair, as if beauty, to remain sublime, had to keep up
Lineaments already shaped by uninhibited divinity); implying, as well, fixated onlookers, i.e.,
Men and women kidding themselves that full-front-and-back nudity is the north
Star of delight rather than imagined nakedness, shudderingly draped like a fully rigged, fully laden ship without a drop to bail,

Gently crushed by its own slight weight, reviving memories of delights once stumbled on as a boy,
Delights often wreathed with necessary pain, like the stout unforgiving thorns
That tear shirt and skin as we stretch for ripe blackberries, to be gulped down fast,
Sweeter than butter and marmalade, quenching our thirst better than sucked ice,
Making us almost drunk as we shriek with false contempt at each benighted ump

Who decides against our teams. What happened to those blissful fruits, honeydew, purple plum,
Lobsters, chops with their succulent tiny interstices, corn sticking to the cob, or the grilled feast

Nest? And when carnality replaced appetite, I was communally pronounced the horniest
Could not climb back up. I still wave my plume, or my horse does, as he canters nobly

Fill my throat, along with immortal memories, of which I must acknowledge the thorniest
But your firm breasts, taut nipples, and bent thighs? No thorns. All you wanted was a loosened peplum,
 So I still bear your plume, and your name will not die: not to be written here or read, but my voice shall sibilate
It so shrilly that unseeded babies hear me, and every hidden woodworm wake from its dream to fall forever from the rafters.

1.

of mannikins, the courage it takes
nothing interminably each day.

that bars them from it) the rushing surf

than those Romans the lava rain stunned
that twisted their limbs, glazed with their pain

You would never know, from the relaxed
completes a backhand with her racket,

swing, or from her smile that she has stood

2.

crazy, but he forgets, and today

strolling on Bloor, he thinks up the same
nodded and smiled at answers to them.

think, I focus on another grove
like worms from the smartly turned-over

and tuck the cuffs into their pockets.
head crazed like china with minute cracks

and must remind myself his show is

to doddering senex: still free now
to do a walk-on, ad lib, bow out.

Summer stock, lacking the tragic poise
we move on towards a shadier place.
Survival is the final offer
that arrives at the eleventh hour
just when pain to the tenth power
would kill you with another ninth degree.

By then, relief strikes you brief as an eighth note;
you wear doom proudly; it's your seventh seal.
But life whispers through your sixth sense
of what might await you in some fifth dimension

where miracle is saved for the fourth quarter.
Tricked, you sigh and rise on the third day.
You know better, but with no second thought,

as if you were back at ground zero, as if it cost
nothing, as if this were not the last laugh.

The oldest sister, her two hands on the table,
about to push herself up, stares with grim
determination at the affronting dishes,
waiting, it seems, until the middle sister
finishes her story, so she can clear them away.
Her gaze so tense with purpose she can almost
see germs spawning in the mess of white fish
flaking from the spines, the smear of egg yolk
and the torn rolls disfiguring the china;
as if the meal, the moment it is over,
the meal she made a point of telling them
she shopped for, got up early to prepare,
were now inedible, because uneaten.
sitting opposite holds up a flared match
over the pipe from which smoke rolls away
across the table like a phantom mold
in and around the open tub of butter,
the gouged block of cream cheese and the coffee cups;
so in a moment when she finally does stand

The youngest sister is sitting on the couch
enough away for no one yet to notice
as her legs cross that the ashtray in her lap
spills ash over the sunflowers of her housedress.
Or that the cigarette between her fingers
sags loosely and is dangling while the hand

Her death is just three months away.

the brother and middle sister would be home,
with sunlight only just now catching on
a corner of the window shut behind them,
shut against the smog, the steady traffic
and the panicked blare and drawn-out whining fade
still cool enough, right now, to keep the body
in the wavering frail zone of what it needs
to be forgotten, so they can sit like this
on the wrecked meal, the brother and sister talking:

Listen, she would be saying, listen, Charlie,
her elbows on the table, both hands open,
What can you do? What are ya gonna do?
sudden illness (And he was my age, just
how sick she got, she always had her hair done),
his back pain, her arthritis, or the daughter
after his joke about the nurse, and hers
about the bedpan, Listen, they each say,
Listen, what are ya gonna do?

until he told her that he had a problem,
that was his first mistake, then he goes
so of course what happens is she wakes up
and finds him weeping at the kitchen table,
you know, nuts, nuts, so naturally she leaves him,

but surely coming for them (the way the sun
burns brick by brick all morning toward the window
is in the body only enough to hold
her shoulders in a way they recognize
as hers, the way their mother did; as if
all trouble were, for now, no heavier
than the familiar voice repeating, Listen,
what happens what was only meant to happen,
coherent with fate, fated as family.

After the funeral three months from now,
tell them they had no business moving away
to Florida, and Irene sick as she was.
And selfish. She was selfish, that one. After
all those years of living with that bum,
her husband, may his cheap soul rest in peace,
And anyway, what could be done for her?
for her to sit all day, and smoke, and not care
ashes were falling on the couch, the carpet;
and now they will hear the old unfairnesses,
old feuds and resentments come to her voice
like consolation, like a mother helping
all that smoke, and running in with nothing
but the dishtowel to beat down the flames,
and Irene, just Irene, just sitting there,
since she was there, she was always there,
her big sister, to clean up the mess?

Only three months, and yet it could be years,
or decades, for the sun has only just now
caught in the window, and its bright plaque warms
the air so gradually that none of them
distracted by a faint sheen prickling the skin,
will break the story, look up toward the window
and, startled by the full glare, check the time.
Right now, though, the future is a luxury
of instances in which the cigarette,
raised halfway to the lips, will go on rising.
Nothing bad, right now, can happen here
except as news, bad news the brother and sister
mull and rehearse, puzzle and fret until
it seems the very telling of it is
what keeps them safe. And safe, too, the oldest sister,
dreaming of all the perishables sealed,
uncontaminated airlessness,
dreaming of how the soapsuds curdle and slide
over the dishes in a soothing fury,
not minding that it scalds her hands to hold
each plate and cup and bowl under the hot,
hard jet of water, if it gets them clean.

No surprise. Bills to pay, pain to obliterate,
a favor to a friend desperate 
for more time before facing facts,
or a reason less beholden to One-day-at-a-time 
I-just-like-getting-high or Then-Jesus-spoke-to-me
vanishes into the Voice the hymn
wrenches from the throats of the spiritual
paupers up there swaying in black satin.
The God of the Garden is the God
of Chemistry, too, a single sniff
can slough errands or heartbreak
so fast into the metaphysical ditch 
for better than the Fall, if Fall this is? 
We all see what the Flood keeps doing.
A little while dry, please, a little while
with no chattering chimp between
the ears & the Wizard once more in Oz.
A plastic tarp in a monsoon may be
her future. A plush ride home to havoc.
A vision that delivers her from want,
deserving or not.

The day the war against Iraq begins
With their outstretched arms and ruffled cups
Blowing in the wind of Jesus Green

Edging the lush grassy moving river
Along with the swans and ducks
Under a soft March Cambridge sky
Embellishing the earth like a hand

Where people in light clothes come out
To play, to frisk and run about
With their lovers, friends, animals, and children

As down every stony back road of history
The daffodils do look as if they dance

And make some of us in the park want to dance
And breathe deeply and I know that
Being able to eat and incorporate beauty like this
I am privileged and by that token can

The cruel wars are good the stupidity is good,
The primates hiding in their caves are very good,
They do their best, which explains poetry.

What explains poetry is that life is hard
But better than the alternatives,
The no and the nothing. Look at this light
And color, a splash of brilliant yellow

Punctuating an emerald text, white swans
And mottled brown ducks floating quietly along
Whole and alive, like an untorn language
That lacks nothing, that excludes

It is our business to defend it
Even the day our masters start a war?
To defend the day we see the daffodils?

After the cocoon I was in a human body

where I felt wings behind me, trying

to tilt me back. They succeeded in doing so
after a day of exertion. I called that time,

overwhelmed with the ghosts of my wings, sleep.

I took pleasure in climbing trees. I snuck food
into all my pains. My mouth produced language

which I attempted to spin over myself
and rip through happier and healthier.

What made me such a failure?

a grown creature telling ghost stories,

staring at pictures, paralyzed for hours.

an undertow sucking me back into myself.

like a boy who takes a razor from a high cabinet
puffs out his cheeks and strips them bloody.

in the marketplace
near your father's church
witness to this love
in this calm fallow
of these minds,
there is no substitute for pain:
genitals gone or going,
seed burned out,
you tuck the roots in the earth,
turn back, and move
by river through the swamps,
singing: a love supreme, a love supreme;
what does it all mean?
Loss, so great each black
woman expects your failure
in mute change, the seed gone.
your song now crystal and
the blues. You pick up the horn
with some will and blow
into the freezing night:

Dawn comes and you cook
up the thick sin 'tween
impotence and death, fuel
the tenor sax cannibal
heart, genitals, and sweat

Why you so black?
cause I am
why you so funky?
cause I am
why you so black?
cause I am
why you so sweet?
cause I am
why you so black?
cause I am
a love supreme, a love supreme:

So sick
you couldn't play Naima,
so flat we ached
for song you'd concealed
with your own blood,
your diseased liver gave
out its purity,
the inflated heart
pumps out, the tenor kiss,
tenor love:

rind. Love held tight in a sonnet.

A sobering thought, the idea of you stretched there,
bittern, under a dark sky, your exposed bones
yellow too in a ditch among cold stones,
ice glittering everywhere on bog and river,
the whole unfortunate country frozen over
a thought more wrenching than the fall of Troy
of delight from a pale patch of watery sunlight
out on the mud there as you took your first
drink of the day and now, destroyed by thirst,
you lie in brambles while the rats rotate.
now, had I known it, we might both be drinking
and singing too; for ours is the same story.
and lie shivering like you under whin-bushes;
but I mourn only the bittern, withdrawn and solitary,
who used to carouse alone among the rushes
and sleep rough in the star-glimmering bog-drain.
It used to be, with characters like us,
but now they have a cure for these psychoses
as indeed they do for most social diseases
and, rich at last, we can forget our pain.
so now, relieved of dangerous stimuli,
as peace with my plastic bottle of H2O
and the slack strings of insouciance, I sit
but the fast bright zing of a winter afternoon
dizzy with head-set, flash-bulb and digifone,
to learn the tao he once claimed as his own
and share with him the moor-hen and the swan,
the thoughtless lyric of a cloud in the sky
and the play of light and shadow on the slow
commemorative waters; relax, go with the flow.

Last night I heard your voice, mother,
    The words you sang to me
When I, a little barefoot boy,
    Knelt down against your knee.

And tears gushed from my heart, mother,
    And passed beyond its wall,
But though the fountain reached my throat
    The drops refused to fall.

'Tis ten years since you died, mother,
    Just ten dark years of pain,
And oh, I only wish that I
    Could weep just once again.

The sun is warm, the sky is clear,

collapses with agonizing pain in his side.

Hogg, thus: Books, boots, papers, shoes, philosophical

which frequently proclaimed the agency of fire.

We lived in utter solitude,
The lightning of the noontide ocean is flashing

of his Defence, and hope, he is characterized

or navy; he would pull down our churches, level

foes instead of a god. His fingers blaze with ink.

the Elysian Fields, the Caverns of the Sibyl ...

that pave the unequal bottom of the water.

From the far star points of his pinned extremities, 
till the hung flesh was empty. 
Lonely in that void even for pain, 
he missed his splintered feet, 
the human stare buried in his face. 
He ached for two hands made of meat 
he could reach to the end of. 
of his heart began to bang 
back into that battered shape. Now 

shatters at birth, rivering every way.

Greed got in the way. We built a fake estate.
Levinas said to see ourselves we need each other yet

doorbells, rows of them, glow in the night village
a string of lit invitations no elbow has leaned into

(both arms embracing messages). Unanswered
the doors are rotting from the bottom up.

Hard core from the quarry might make it level,

hard core and cunning speculation into matters
concerning love and doubt, concerning want and plenty.

O the places where pavement runs out and ragwort

anywhere neatly, a petered-out plot of Tayto 
tumbleweeds, bin bags, rebar, roof slates, offcuts,

guttering, drain grilles, doodads, infill, gravel!
A not-as-yet nice establishment, possessing potential

where we have no authorized voice but are oddly fitted
out for the pain it takes to build bit by bit.

When the last contractions brought us to the brink
of our new predicament, we became developers.

You love your friend, so you fly across the country to see her.

You try across with your friend. You try around.

When we stop where you lived, the house
 has thickened, the entry
 level to the wall with bricks, as though
 it could keep you out.
 Again the dream has fooled you into waking
 and we have walked out
 past ourselves, through the windows
 to be remembered in the light
 of closed rooms
 as a series of impositions
 startled out of us so it lingers
 along a brick front.
 You are leading me back to the burned arcade
 where you said I stood with you
 in your childhood last night, your childhood
 which includes me now
 as surely as the look of that missing face
 between the rows of houses.
 We have gone so far into your past
 that nothing reflects us.
 No sun gleams from the glassless frame
 where a room burned,
 though the house stayed whole. There 
 is your school, your church, 
 the place you drank cider at lunch time.
 New rows of houses are going up.
 Children play quietly in a stairwell.
 Walking back, you tell the story
 making two clean holes in the taxi, how
 the driver ducked and drove on
 like nothing happened. No pain
 passed through you; it
 did not even stop the car
 or make you live more
 carefully. Near the check point we 
 stop talking, you let the hands
 rub your clothes
 against your body. You seem to be 
 there, all there.
 Watching, I am more apart
 for the sign of dismissal they will give me,
 thinking a woman would not conceal
 as I have, the perfect map
 of this return where I have met 
 and lost you willingly
 in a dead and living place.
 Now when you find me next in the dream,
 this boundary will move with us.
 We will both come back.

Zigging, mid-
his cane sweeping
over

broken asphalt,
like a sapper or
an open skiff on back-splashing seas. For a few
unclear

if he gets
the risk,
as yellow cabs swoop down and flock at the light.
Then, safe
home

on the other
side. And I
for one cannot take my eyes off him as he pivots,
compassing
north.

truly clear.
Now he jams himself at pace between a giant planter
and cross-braced
scaffold

newly set up
at Finnegans.
And wham. The guy is smack on his ass, un-staring up
to heaven,
stunned.

Damn,
I think, what
want

you back
(though that
once ate up years of my life and left me blown like an artery
after too many
bypasses),

nor does it
compare to
probably
lose.

as if a hammer
dropped from a sill and laid him out cold. That scaffold
just appeared there
overnight.

And for all
my hard-won bile
to think I
am.

The worst for him was his friend turned wolf,
and the blood that splattered as he ran. The worst
for us: the hospital, his upper lip tugged back
that rubs pain out. He submits
to the quick stitch, the thread black
against pink skin, calm now he sees
the doctor can be trusted, his voice
soothing, his face clean shaven,
the clues that signal kindness to a child.
were over when it leapt for his throat
and caught his mouth. The scars, at least,
no beast will tear into his dreams. And we
will want him there, our bodies makeshift walls.
We who led the stranger to our home,
fixed him a bowl, taught him to sleep
under our blankets, we who taught our son
to rub the muzzle that sheathes the teeth.

When I dare at last to imagine hunger,
see farmer wandering his parched fields
knowing nothing to do, finally, but sleep
the day out in the barn's long shadow,
dreaming of the family dog he drove
deep into a neighboring county
and abandoned by the side of the road.
timid and gimp, a halo of gnats
festering between its swollen testicles
into some pines, tethers it with a tentstake
and a chain as the late summer light
spirals and drapes over the branches,
a mirage the dog slavers and snaps at.
Consider the boy's amusement
as he imagines the animal jerking the light
down and the ruckus of bells that clang
and catapult from the treetop belfries,
and circus peanuts, coins and fluttering dollar bills.
The real possibilities are beyond him.
The dog as a parable of pain or loss.
Hunger as some small iridescent thing at work
inside the animal, hovering around its heart
the way a lone dragonfly skirts the dry pond crater,
from dust, dust unbuckled from air.
By now, the dog's given up, and the boy
watches its tongue loll in the pine needles,
the heave and fall of its stomach, its eyes
following birdflight in and out of the shade.
Restless for something he cannot name,
he imagines the music he might make
if he thumped the dog's belly like a drum.
Imagines its eyes are the color of iron.
Imagines the unimaginable and does it,
the tire tool and the belly unwilling instruments,
and the dog's caterwaul is not like music
at all and when night comes the cricketsong
dulcifies nothing, the dog's body
is just a body, is not paltry, is not glorified.
What hunger is this that haunts the boy,
that haunts the man sleeping in the shade?
Watch as the dragonfly dips into his open mouth
and keeps going, a blur between bone and sinew,
a wet thread collapsing soft caverns of flesh,
gone to where his body is a field
honed by sleeves of sunlight,
to where the boy ceases to be and the man wakes.
He knows what flits through him now
keeps the time with its thrumming,
carrying him away from himself
in the heat, a winnowing sliver of light.

1. Animals

Cows we bought in Salzburg form a tiny herd.
Or seven universal poses are assumed by cats.

Misery, hypocrisy, greed: A dying
Uniforms and frock coats exhibit these traits.
Of their creation with a poetry at once too vague

And too precise to do anything with but
By accident, completely comprehending
About them; but they never speak. They never even move

A sort of ghostly wolf, a lizard, an ape
At nothing, manage to see everything invisible

To ours, even with all the time in the world
Of this in the only way we really can:
In which it is to be left hanging; or a stiff scream,

Folded like a sheet of paper over all
Going to have. That vanished before our eyes
Our words, poor animals whose home is in another world.

Tiny outbursts of sunlight play
Strewn on the surface of the bay.
Up the coast the water backs up
According to photographs, it is less
Reflecting it, allowing beaten silver sheets
Ends abruptly in the forest on the shore.

Which heaven has finally made clear.

Green lichen fastened to a blue rock
Everything that sustains it: the dead leaves
When autumn drops its tear upon them, turn.

Mine and it was like dying: alone,
Huddled under the cold blue dome of the stars,
I kept trying to look at myself. It was like looking into the sun and I went blind.

O, to break open that inert light
Like a stone and let the vision slowly sink down
I was getting so tired of that excuse: refusing love
Acts and words of love; until a soft monstrosity of song
Has come and only starlight trickles through the dome;

And yet I only wanted to be happy.
I wanted rest and innocence; a place
Where I could hide each secret fear by blessing it,
I tried to crawl inside the heavy, slaughtered hands of love
Like a stab of paradise: explode: and then at last
Exhausted, heal into pain. And that was happiness:
A dream whose ending never ends, a vein

Of blood, a hollow entity
Consumed by consummation, bleeding so.
In the sky our eyes ascend to as they sweep
Lullabies and children wake up glistening with screams
They left asleep; and the dead are dead. The wounded worship death
And live a little while in love; and then are gone.
Until we know, until we come to recognize as ours,
Those other lives that live within us as our own.
We had been married for six or seven years 
when my wife, standing in the kitchen one afternoon, told me

that, in fact, she has been screaming for years
into the blue chlorinated water of the community pool

Buttering her toast, not as if she had been 
concealing anything, 
not as if I should consider myself

personally the cause of her screaming,
right that minute on the kitchen table,

and I could see her turn her square face up 
to take a gulp of oxygen,

then down again into the cold wet mask of the unconscious.
For all I know, maybe everyone is screaming 
as they go through life, silently,

politely keeping the big secret 
that it is not all fun
to be ripped by the crooked beak

of something called psychology,
to be dipped down 
again and again into time;

that the truest, most intimate 
pleasure you can sometimes find
is the wet kiss 

of your own pain.
There goes Kath, at one pm, to swim her twenty-two laps
back and forth in the community pool; 

Twenty-two laps like twenty-two pages, 
that will never be read by anyone.

The sea is calm tonight. 
The tide is full, the moon lies fair 
Upon the straits; on the French coast the light 
Gleams and is gone; the cliffs of England stand, 
Glimmering and vast, out in the tranquil bay. 
Come to the window, sweet is the night-air! 
Only, from the long line of spray 
Where the sea meets the moon-blanched land, 
Listen! you hear the grating roar 
Of pebbles which the waves draw back, and fling, 
At their return, up the high strand, 
Begin, and cease, and then again begin, 
With tremulous cadence slow, and bring 
The eternal note of sadness in. 

Sophocles long ago 
Into his mind the turbid ebb and flow 
Of human misery; we 
Find also in the sound a thought, 
Hearing it by this distant northern sea. 

The Sea of Faith 
Lay like the folds of a bright girdle furled. 
But now I only hear 
Its melancholy, long, withdrawing roar, 
Retreating, to the breath 
Of the night-wind, down the vast edges drear 
And naked shingles of the world. 

Ah, love, let us be true 
To one another! for the world, which seems 
To lie before us like a land of dreams, 
So various, so beautiful, so new, 
Hath really neither joy, nor love, nor light, 
Nor certitude, nor peace, nor help for pain; 
And we are here as on a darkling plain 
Swept with confused alarms of struggle and flight, 
Where ignorant armies clash by night.

People traveled from miles away to see
the jeweled armor of their scales, the beadlike

set of their eyes in
rubbery socket rings, the glimmering
swish of fin and tail

so real it seemed that you could almost dip
a net deep into
the paper and pull up the arching wet

weight of a golden carp,
a shiny trout, or the dark muscular
heft of a bass with

its mouth stretched into the surprised, wiry
sock. I captured my models from the sea,

lake, and goldfish pond
in the back garden, so careful not to
let their mouths be torn

by the hook, their scales chipped, or the silky
tissue of their tails
ripped by a clumsy hand. I kept them in

large glass bowls, fed them
mosquito wings or dry silkworm pupas
offered from chopsticks,

and when I was finished making sketches,
I quickly took them
back and set them free again. Every

night I dream I swim

pulled to the surface by the deceptive
creamy luster of
the moon or the sizzle of firefly lights

across the water.
And every night I am tempted once
again by the smell

of the baited hook, by my predictable
hunger for earthly
things, and each time I am surprised again

by the stinging hook
in my lip that pulls me mercilessly
into the bright air,

setting my gills on fire, the sharp, silver
pain of the knife that
slits me open so easily from tail

to throat to reveal
the scarlet elastic of my raw gills,
the translucent film

of my air sac, the milky rise of my
stomach, and the gray
marbled coil of my intestines. I rise

late each day, and work
in brighter light. When I die, I will
have my paintings brought

down to the lake and slipped into the water.
First the edges of
ink will blur, and then there will be a great

flurry as the fins,
tails, and bodies begin blossoming in-
to life again, each

fish detaching from its canvas of silk
swirl of color, motion, swimming away.

Where sunless rivers weep
Their waves into the deep,
She sleeps a charmed sleep:
      Awake her not.
Led by a single star,
She came from very far
To seek where shadows are
      Her pleasant lot.

She left the rosy morn,
She left the fields of corn,
For twilight cold and lorn
      And water springs.
Through sleep, as through a veil,
She sees the sky look pale,
And hears the nightingale
      That sadly sings.

Rest, rest, a perfect rest
Shed over brow and breast;
Her face is toward the west,
      The purple land.
She cannot see the grain
Ripening on hill and plain;
She cannot feel the rain
      Upon her hand.

Rest, rest, for evermore
Upon a mossy shore;
Rest, rest at the heart's core
      Till time shall cease:
Sleep that no pain shall wake;
Night that no morn shall break
Till joy shall overtake
      Her perfect peace.

Myself I'm like a dress my mother made
me, a fabric self split open with a sigh
material than we'd had before. I got
the sense it was all wasted on me.
But a needle's sharp to pierce, is itself
Like I learned: no dress could ever be
beautiful or best if it had me in it.
I was the stain in a place we couldn't fix.
Having fallen on a slicer of some kind.
Double-seamed, scabbed over, a new body
pocket in the pattern. How to stitch up
that wound right into the clean vertical rip
in some on-sale flannelette?
I'd never again be cold. Skin's holey not holy.
In mad winter alone with drink, I think:
tattoo needles don't use thread but ink
to mark a place in this ever-moving skin
and that wound is ornament. But who
needs a mark to know what's marked?
I would pray to the dark in the dark.
But what did I ask for, what did I know
to ask for? Nonfatal wounds: they're there
when we die, deliquescent, vibrating like a drum
skin just after each beat moves off.
A part of music. A way a body keeps time,
is time's keeper, vigilant till time up and goes
to find another body. Another's warmth
and shelter. Or related injuries. Anyone
who hurts another was hurt that same way,
so how far back behind our backs do we go
to finally find the first hurt; whose finger
points to say, "You! You're the one who god
knows why started a cycle of unending pain,"
to someone's child in short pants?
A baby just torn a hole in her amnion swirl?
And what of me? I can't tell where my flesh
meets the rest of me, ragbag full of rags,
shot full of holes but that's just the way cotton
and silk and everything I said up till now looks
when it hits the air and is cried on. I'm so inside
out I evaporated entirely already as August does,
unsalvageable. Who would ever love me like this?
And just like that, I stopped thinking about it.
I agree to meet you at the ferry heading to a place
neither of us wants to go but both just said
sure, I'll go... if you want! We should turn back,
nobody said. Oh we should before it's too late,
nobody said again, insistent this time.

1.
 The earth is dry and they live wanting.
 Each with a small reservoir
 Of furious music heavy in the throat.
 They drag it out and with nails in their feet
 Coax the night into being. Brief believing.
 A skirt shimmering with sequins and lies.
 And in this night that is not night,
 Each word is a wish, each phrase
 They defy gravity to feel tugged back.
 The clatter, the mad slap of landing.
 And not just them. Not just
Primitos, not just the bailaor
 Whose heels have notched 
 And hammered time
 So the hours flow in place
 Like a tin river, marking
 Only what once was.
Not just the voices of scraping
 Against the river, nor the hands 
 Nudging them farther, fingers
 Like blind birds, palms empty, 
 Echoing. Not just the women
 With sober faces and flowers
 In their hair, the ones who dance
 Beneath them.
 To set myself heavily beside them.
 The body a myth, a parable
 For what not even language
 Moves quickly enough to name.
 If I call it pain, and try to touch it
 With my hands, my own life,
 It lies still and the music thins,
 A pulse felt for through garments. 
 If I lean unbuttoned into the blow
 Of loss after loss, love tossed
 It carries me with it farther,
 To chords that stretch and bend
 Like light through colored glass.
 But it races on, toward shadows
 Where the world I know
 And the world I fear
 Threaten to meet.
 There is always a road,
 The sea, dark hair, dolor.
 Always a question

When my brother came home from war 
he carried his left arm in a black sling 
but assured us most of it was still there. 
Spring was late, the trees forgot to leaf out. 

I stood in a long line waiting for bread. 
The woman behind me said it was shameless, 
someone as strong as I still home, still intact 
while her Michael was burning to death. 

Yes, she could feel the fire, could smell 
younger than I, who was only fourteen, 

taller, more handsome in his white uniform 
turning slowly gray the way unprimed wood 
grays slowly in the grate when the flames 

she said when I turned to face her. She placed 
both hands on my shoulders, kissed each eyelid, 
hugged me to her breasts and whispered wetly 

When I got home my brother ate the bread 
carefully one slice at a time until 

That afternoon I walked the crowded streets 
something familiar, a face or a voice or less, 
but not these shards of ash that fell from heaven.

of eagles over the block, right over our house,
not more than twenty feet above the roof,
so massive their wings pull at the corrugated
tin sheeting even with gentlest tilt, counteracts
bitterness against all the damage I see and hear
around me on an exclusively crisp blue morning,
when clarity is pain and even one small missing
wattle tree, entirely vanquished since I was last here 
a region is not a pinpoint and a different compass
works in my head, having magnetics for all
directions and all pointing to one spot 
I know and observe as closely as possible; 
and even one small vanished or vanquished
wattle tree is agony close to death for me,
where I find it hard to breathe to feed myself
to get past the loss; but the pair of eagles
still appearing and keeping their sharp
and scrupulous eyes honed, overrides
this ordeal, though I wish their victims
life too and their damage is traumatic
or nonsense as I can make in such blue light.

for the chance at the chair
while the eagle claws holes
a fisted comb through stubborn
faced boys asking Eddie
to cut in parts and arrows
wanting to have their names read
stopping their games of ivory

A learned and a happy ignorance 
From all the sloth, care, pain, and sorrow that advance 
Of men. No error, no distraction I 
Saw soil the earth, or overcloud the sky. 

The world; nor did I dream of such a thing 
They all were brisk and living wights to me, 
Yea, pure and full of immortality. 

My ears and heart did fill and freely move. 
The Universe was then a world of treasure, 
To me an universal world of pleasure. 

Shops, markets, taverns, coaches, were unshown; 

As yet lay under ground; my blessed fate 
And innocent delights which he did see 
In his original simplicity. 

Was my protection when I first was born. 
Which God first made. The first effects of love 
My first enjoyments upon earth did prove; 

Them here at first, they did my soul allure, 
Quite from the works of men; that I might see 
The glorious wonders of the Deity.

Supper comes at five o'clock,
    At six, the evening star,
    But eight o'clock is far.

How could I bear my pain all day
    Unless I watched to see
The clock-hands laboring to bring
    Eight o'clock to me.

Transgendered Professor Y. in leather miniskirt
paces before the screen, wood pointer
scraping saint faces, slapping 
hunched women of the Lamentation. 
Blue-gold tumult of the chapel walls. 
After-lunch lecture hall heat. 
bartender, Cantonese. HURRY UP PLEASE 
ITS TIME. Twenty years later,
I get your news by Facebook update,
three hundred characters or less, 
waiting for the Scrovegni to open
in the windy square across from 
dust flecks foaming past fetlocks 
long ago, stopped, pitied, forgot. 
Some remember the Berlin Wall,
some remember Vietnam or the first Gulf War,
by my chair in the smelly bedroom,
blue sheets undone. You scrub at your head
wet from the shower, drop the towel
on the floor. You ice my earlobe, light a match
to sterilize the needle: Give me a small red new potato,
you say. Kev pierced my ear with a needle and potato.
We were drunk, maybe tripping. Mom was waiting
when I came in, 3am, and saw the blood...You jab.
No pain. A tearing through resistance, 
tissues numbly separating. You do your mom:
JesusMaryandJoseph! she screamed. Have mercy!

Those twenty-six letters filling the blackboard
Compose the dark, compose
The illiterate summer sky & its stars as they appear

One by one, above the schoolyard.

If the soul had a written history, nothing would have happened:
A bird would still be riding the back of a horse,

And the horse would go on grazing in a field, & the gleaners,

At one with the land, the wind, the sun examining
Their faces, would go on working,

Each moment forgotten in the swipe of a scythe.

But the walls of the labyrinth have already acquired
Their rose tint from the blood of slaves
Crushed into the stone used to build them, & the windows

Of stained glass are held in place by the shriek

And sighing body of a falling chimneysweep through
The baked & blackened air. This ash was once a village,

That snowflake, time itself.

But until the day it is permitted to curl up in a doorway,
And try to sleep, the snow falling just beyond it,

The soul rests its head in its hands & stares out
From its desk at the trash-littered schoolyard,

It stays where it was left.
When the window fills with pain, the soul bears witness,

Having no need to, having no home.
In this way, & in no other

Was the soul gradually replaced by the tens of thousands

All of which proclaimed, or else lamented, its absence.

Until, in the drone of auditoriums & lecture halls, it became
No more than the scraping of a branch
Against the side of a house, no more than the wincing

Of a patient on a couch, or the pinched, nasal tenor

While this sound of scratching, this tapping all night,
Enlarging the quiet instead of making a music within it,

Is just a way of joining one thing to another,

Sitting there while also being led through the schoolyard

A way of joining or trying to join one thing to another,
So that the stillness of the clouds & the sky

Opening beneath the blindfold of the prisoner, & the cop
Who leads him toward it, toward the blank

Sail of the sky at the end of the world, are bewildered

So that everything, in this moment, bewilders

Them: the odd gentleness each feels in the hand

Not for anything.

Coming home with the last load I ride standing
on the wagon tongue, behind the tractor
in hot exhaust, lank with sweat,

my arms strung
awkwardly along the hayrack, cruciform.

this afternoon, Marshall and I.
And of course I think of another who hung
like this on another cross. My hands are torn

by baling twine, not nails, and my side is pierced
by my ulcer, not a lance. The acid in my throat
is only hayseed. Yet exhaustion and the way

my body hangs from twisted shoulders, suspended
on two points of pain in the rising
monoxide, recall that greater suffering.

Well, I change grip and the image
brought on the grass tremendously, a monster crop,

but wet, always wet. Haying was long delayed.
Now is our last chance to bring in

We mow, rake, bale, and draw the bales
to the barn, these late, half-green,
improperly cured bales; some weigh 150 pounds

or more, yet must be lugged by the twine
across the field, tossed on the load, and then
at the barn unloaded on the conveyor

and hold up my end pretty well too; but God,

the close of day, how I fall down then. My hands
are sore, they flinch when I light my pipe.
I think of those who have done slave labor,

less able and less well prepared than I.
Rose Marie in the rye fields of Saxony,
her father in the camps of Moldavia

and the Crimea, all clerks and housekeepers
herded to the gaunt fields of torture. Hands
too bloodied cannot bear

even the touch of air, even
the touch of love. I have a friend
whose grandmother cut cane with a machete

and cut and cut, until one day
she snicked her hand off and took it
and threw it grandly at the sky. Now

in September our New England mountains
begin to glow, maples, beeches, birches

in their first color. I look
beyond our famous hayfields to our famous hills,
to the notch where the sunset is beginning,

then in the other direction, eastward,
where a full new-risen moon like a pale
medallion hangs in a lavender cloud

beyond the barn. My eyes
sting with sweat and loveliness. And who
is the Christ now, who

if not I? It must be so. My strength
is legion. And I stand up high
on the wagon tongue in my whole bones to say

woe to you, watch out
you sons of bitches who would drive men and women
to the fields where they can only die.

there was hunger prefossil, 

there was pain before a nervous system  
to convey it to the brain, there existed 

poverty before intelligence, or accountants,  
before narration; there was bankruptcy aswirl 

in nowhere, it was palpable 
where nothing was palpable, there was repossession 

in the gasses forming so many billion ... ; 

ash, in marl, and coming loam, 
thirst in the few strands of hay slipping 

in the reptile and the first birds, 

poverty aloof and no mystery like God  
its maker; there was surely want 

in one steamed and sagging onion,  
there was poverty in the shard of bread 

sopped in the final drop of gravy 

First the bad boots
give up their strength, then the toes lift
their anchors. The ankle
bones are broken, 
and so on, until the bladder lets go, without 
shame, and the genital 
organ washes away, the ovum 
and her fertile signals. A proxy pain 
stands in for the larger
intangible.

Has nothing to do
with tufts of snow blown upon
the unforgiving surface,
but how I mistook the beauty of those particle
deaths, their of-the-world
stardom, as a kind of metaphysical river,
that if I looked long enough,
with enough reverence...

Let my waist, bled numb, stand in
for that miscalculation. And the severed 
blown off the stricken
self. I saw formal water,
knowing my body wanted to go there.
My only child. How

If we could get the hang of it entirely

If we could find our happiness entirely
But, as it is, the spears each year go through

And if the world were black or white entirely
Instead of a mad weir of tigerish waters,
Bored but in brute reality there is no

What on Earth deserves our trust?
Youth and Beauty both are dust.
Long we gathering are with pain,
What one moment calls again.
Seven years childless marriage past,
A Son, a son is born at last:
Full of good Spirits, Meen, and Air,
As a long life promised,
Yet, in less than six weeks dead.
Too promising, too great a mind
In so small room to be confined:
Therefore, as fit in Heaven to dwell,
He quickly broke the Prison shell.
So the subtle Alchemist,
And so the Sun if it arise
Half so glorious as his Eyes,
Like this Infant, takes a shrowd,
Buried in a morning Cloud.

I

Rose of fate, you looked for ways to wound us
yet you bent like the secret about to be released
and the command you chose to give us was beautiful
and your smile was like a ready sword.

The ascent of your cycle livened creation
our impulse dawned naked to possess you
the world was easy: a simple pulsation.

The secrets of the sea are forgotten on the shores
the darkness of the depths is forgotten in the surf;
the corals of memory suddenly shine purple. . .
O do not stir. . . listen to hear its light

motion. . . you touched the tree with the apples
the hand reached out, the thread points the way and guides you. . .
O dark shivering in the roots and the leaves
if it were but you who would bring the forgotten dawn!

May lilies blossom again on the meadow of separation
may days open mature, the embrace of the heavens,
may those eyes alone shine in the glare
the pure soul be outlined like the song of a flute.

Was it night that shut its eyes? Ashes remain,
as from the string of a bow a choked hum remains,
ash and dizziness on the black shore
and dense fluttering imprisoned in surmise.

Rose of the wind, you knew but took us unknowing
at a time when thought was building bridges
so that fingers would knit and two fates pass by
and spill into the low and rested light.

O dark shivering in the roots and the leaves!
Come forth sleepless form in the gathering silence
raise your head from your cupped hands
so that your will be done and you tell me again

the words that touched and merged with the blood like an embrace;
and let your desire, deep like the shade of a walnut tree, bend
and flood us with your lavish hair
from the down of the kiss to the leaves of the heart.

You lowered your eyes and you had the smile
that masters of another time humbly painted.
Forgotten reading from an ancient gospel,
your words breathed and your voice was gentle:

and pain floats lightly in my soul
dawn breaks in the heavens, the dream remains afloat

a flock of doves awakens and descends
their low, circling flight entangles me
the stars are a human touch on my breast.

adverse and confused lament of the world
but these are moments only, they disappear,
and the two-branched thought of my desire reigns alone.

when you came, strange and familiar, my beloved
to grant me, bending, the boundless deliverance

The broken sunset declined and was gone
and it seemed a delusion to ask for the gifts of the sky.

. . . In the mirror how our love diminishes
in sleep the dreams, school of oblivion
in the depths of time, how the heart contracts
and vanishes in the rocking of a foreign embrace. . .

Two serpents, beautiful, apart, tentacles of separation
crawl and search, in the night of the trees,
for a secret love in hidden bowers;
sleepless they search, they neither drink nor eat.

Circling, twisting, their insatiable intent
spins, multiplies, turns, spreads rings on the body
which the laws of the starry dome silently govern,
stirring its hot, irrepressible frenzy.

The forest stands as a shivering pillar for night
and the silence is a silver cup where moments fall
echoes distinct, whole, a careful chisel
sustained by carved lines. . .

The statue suddenly dawns. But the bodies have vanished
in the sea in the wind in the sun in the rain.
So the beauties nature grants us are born

The parted serpents must have circled in fantasy
(the forest shimmers with birds, shoots, blossoms)
their wavy searching still remains,
like the turnings of the cycle that bring sorrow.

Where is the double-edged day that had changed everything?
for the soul benumbed and nourished by the lotus?

On the stone of patience we wait for the miracle
that opens the heavens and makes all things possible
we wait for the angel as in the age-old drama
at the moment when the open roses of twilight

disappear. . . Red rose of the wind and of fate,
you remained in memory only, a heavy rhythm
rose of the night, you passed, undulating purple
undulation of the sea. . . The world is simple.

Dear Regret, my leaning this morning, my leather foot, want of stone, my age
Old, burnished and bruised, my hair lingering, my hand caked, spongy as
November my dear Relentless, my dear Aging, your voice tinny, dissonant 
Zeppelins over Piccadilly, bombing blindly in the fog. Dear Skin, dear Tobacco 
Mouth my refusal, my merely geographic, my fibrous strings for you: your 
Abundant wit, your lack of shadow and still joy nosing the air. Each moment 
Stretches toward you, your dry feet: I carried them, pumiced and peppery
Laid them where regret is a biscuit thing to lean upon and sweeten, 
My hour of you, my cursive thoughts, a pulpit beating under these ribs.

Dear Time, you swallowed us whole, swallowed us lovely, sharp as bones
Crimping sadly under foot my benign, my flotsam and crabs thin as leaves 
Your smoothing, your sinking in. Mornings or mooring, or wallowing 
Jericho: tapioca air indolent. I am still there, supple and driftwood, you lovely, 
You loved me, your memory dark and west, thoughts like tugboats stitching
The horizon, you pulling me, my pudding, my thin crustacean, sideways
In the late afternoon, your gaze, having so soon forgotten the sharpness 
Of mornings, the bite of your look serrating the hour: my treasures, all 
Of them, for the pleasure of that slice once more, of our dangling, 
You and me, the lot of us in some car, driving some hour, mapless. 

Under a spiderweb, a tire, slouched: flat, sad-lipped, I think of Newton 
Of the original apple, all of these clones since, all of these scentless 
Descents. I shake my glass, shake again, melted suffixes tinkling; observe 
All things natural: foliage unfurling like old bills, wryly betraying 
Your habits, like the dog who digs and rubs, the dog who whines, who
Paws and circles, you trace. Why is pain so much better than nothing? Or 
The mark of it more understandable? Why is saying nothing so much better? 
Your one-liner like blossoms, uplifting, your currents strap me to air, yes
Which if I recall, are sweet as kernels of corn, if I recall so long ago. 

To arrive is practice, conversation or conversion, a story over a field 
My Sweet, of concrete or whispering, furrows of a path no longer, not 
Sure, was there, and snow combed in curlicues and dog ears a zigzag 
Through January. Sure you are witty, but are you any less romantic? 
In my remembering, I have undone all my beliefs, it is a luxury to lay 
Unencumbered here, or there, the bones flexed with tendons, the 
Spine like a seahorse, the heart far from a cliche unless beating is
Innocent, though innocence is not as supple as you think, nor as flexible, 
Nor as perfumed, nor convenient, or even clean: between things regret 
Gathers force. I remember that day: it was cold and the coffee tepid.

The small red balloons like thumbprints, waves green as the brush of 
Cedar, the wind lapping your hoodie, blind strings tap the air, camera
The dogs of English Bay angling off-leash. I would follow backward, 
Lay old maps on your white sheets, so sincere, I am in earnest for you: 
Having the wind slip in under our belt loops, though I gently refuse 
Gor-Tex, and you bet I will not concede the game. Those small red 
Balloons like tulips in your eyes specs of amber, an amulet, an avatar, 
My thoughts of you fully indexed, ready to step into. 

Close to the gates of Paradise I flee; 
My God, my God, open the gates to me! 

My eyes are burning so I cannot see; 
My God, my God, open the gates to me! 

I ate the fruit of the forbidden tree, 
My God, my God, open the gates to me! 

Am I shut out for all eternity? 
My God, my God, open the gates to me! 

Let me come in where birds and flowers be; 
Lord God, Lord God, open the gates to me!

At the greyhound bus stations, at airports, at silent wharfs
the bodies exit the crafts. Women, men, children; cast out
from the new paradise.

They are not there in the homeland, in Argentina, not there
in Santiago, Chile; never there in Montevideo, Uruguay,
and they are not here

in America

They are in exile: a slow scream across a yellow bridge
the jaws stretched, widening, the eyes multiplied into blood
orbits, torn, whirling, spilling between two slopes; the sea, black,
swallowing all prayers, shadeless. Only tall faceless figures
of pain flutter across the bridge. They pace in charred suits,
the hands lift, point and ache and fly at sunset as cold dark
birds. They will hover over the dead ones: a family shattered
by military, buried by hunger, asleep now with the eyes burning

en exilio

From here we see them, we the ones from here, not there or across,
only here, without the bridge, without the arms as blue liquid
quenching the secret thirst of unmarked graves, without
our flesh journeying refuge or pilgrimage; not passengers
on imaginary ships sailing between reef and sky, we that die
here awake on Harrison Street, on Excelsior Avenue clutching
the tenderness of chrome radios, whispering to the saints
in supermarkets, motionless in the chasm of playgrounds,
searching at 9 a.m. from our third floor cells, bowing mute,
shoving the curtains with trembling speckled brown hands. Alone,
we look out to the wires, the summer, to the newspaper wound

in knots as matches for tenements. We that look out from
our miniature vestibules, peering out from our old clothes,
the father's well-sewn plaid shirt pocket, an old woman's
oversized wool sweater peering out from the makeshift kitchen.
We peer out to the streets, to the parades, we the ones from here
not there or across, from here, only here. Where is our exile?
Who has taken it?

It takes just two people to bring the world
to ruin. So goes the history of love.
At the end of the day we tally the casualties
of war, victory for the one who gets wounded
just the skin of some incandescent creature
whose grotesque beauty is what we adore,
whom some people call love, whom we
venerate because it consumes us, slim pickings
just around the bend. I say all we have
is unconditional surrender to the future.
So unreliable is the past that I feel compelled
to leave unmourned the blind, relentless loves
that may have scorched into our hearts
the way the saints accepted stigmata. My people say,
look back or lose your way. Or, walk backwards,
if you can. So I found myself on a bus to New York City
to lose myself completely. Past Hunters Point
from which a silk-like canopy of smoke rose to meet
as nebulous as Nebuchadnezzar, our live
not worth a footnote, our grandest schemes
no more than feeble whispers, all memory
shifting like the continental plates. In the future,
all science will finally come around; genetic
and we will be a super race in a world
infallibly perfected, where trains run on time,
love never dies, and hope can be purchased
of the cell lines. We will choose what will survive.
Our destiny made lucid, we will find the world
contemplating itself, like the young Narcissus,
one hand about to touch the pool, his body
lurched towards that marvelous reflection.
to desensitize our failures. My people say,
to go unnoticed, you play dead. I myself
may have chosen to forget a face, a name,
some cruel word uttered carelessly, but not,
after all the harm is done, intending any pain.
And many others may have chosen to forget me.
It works both ways. My people say, nasa huli
ang pagsisi: regret is the final emotion.

A doctor, of great skill and fame, 
Paulo Purganti was his name, 
Had a good, comely, virtuous wife; 
No woman led a better life: 
She to intrigue was ev'n hard hearted: 
She chuckled when a bawd was carted; 
And thought the nation ne'er would thrive, 
She thought no mercy should be had; 
They should be hanged, or starved, or flayed, 
Or served like Romish priests in Swede. 
In short, all lewdness she defied; 
And stiff was her parochial pride. 
Was a great lover of that same; 
And could from Scripture take her cue, 
That husbands should give wives their due. 
That, if in some regards, she chose
To curb poor Paulo in too close;
In others, she relaxed again,
And governed with a looser rein.
The doctor from excess of wine;
With oysters, eggs, and vermicelli,
She let him almost burst his belly:
Thus, drying coffee was denied;
But chocolate that want supplied;
(Blest resolution!) one might see
Eringo roots, and Bohea tea.
She often stroked the doctor's band,
And stroked his beard, and kissed his hand,
Kindly complained, that after noon
He went to pore on books too soon:
She held it wholesomer by much,
To rest a little on the couch;
About his waist in bed-a-nights
But had not always wherewithal.
Was lengthened by the Fox's tail;
And Art supplies, where Strength may fail.
The enemy he could not beat,
He strove to lengthen the campaign,
And save his forces by chicane.
Fabius, the Roman chief, who thus
By fair retreat grew Maximus,
Shows us, that all warrior can do,
With Love, and Joy, and Life, and Dear,
Our Don, who knew this tittle-tattle
Did, sure as trumpet, call to battle,
To ward against the coming blow:
To ward: But how? ay, there's the question:
Fierce the assault, unarmed the bastion.
He felt her pulse; he viewed her eyes;
That was too fast; these rolled too quick:
She was, he said, or would be sick:
He judged it absolutely good,
That she should purge, and cleanse her blood.
Spa-waters to that end were got:
If they passed easily or not,
What matters it? the lady's fever
Continued as violent as ever.
(Blackmore and Hans are of my mind)
If once it youthful blood infects,
Is scarce removed by pill or potion;
Whate'er may be our doctor's notion.
The doctor and the dame were laid,
Again this cruel fever came:
High pulse, short breath, and blood in flame.
What measures shall poor Paulo keep
She, like Macbeth, has murdered sleep,
Sad state of matters! when we dare
Nor ask for peace, nor offer war:
Nor Livy nor Comines have shown,
What in this juncture may be done.
Grotius might own, that Paulo's case is
Harder, than any which he places
He strove, alas, but strove in vain,
By dint of logic to maintain
Down to her Ladyship from Eve.
He ranged his tropes, and preached up patience;
Backed his opinion with quotations,
Divines and moralists; and run on
Quite through from Seneca to Bunyan.
As much in vain he bid her try
To fold her arms, to close her eye;
Telling her, rest would do her good,
If any thing in Nature could:
So held the Greeks quite down from Galen,
Masters and princes of the calling:
So all our modern friends maintain,
(Though no great Greeks) in Warwick-lane.
A tale should never be too long.
And sighed, and tossed, and groaned, and turned:
(And whispered something in his ear).
You wish! wish on, the doctor cries:
Lord! when will womankind be wise?
What! in your waters; are you mad?
Why, poison is not half so bad.
'Tis kind, my dear, what you advise,
The lady with a sign replies:
But life, you know, at best is pain:
And death is what we should disdain.
So do it therefore, and adieu:
Let wanton wives by death be scared:
But, to my comfort, I'm prepared.

about the syncretic effect when each person plugs
they become opened up and other beings can see into
their minds. This was considered a science fiction idea
to many people, but not to me.
In my negative space construction is always occurring.

The liftoff from awful to tolerable
to positive and then finally to bright new beautiful
has been my most difficult task to swing.
I live here and being here and hearing myself
that I must do everything I can to save us from the pit.

That is, until the pit splits and the fruit tree finally grows.
in your own tree. Congratulations. If you write an instructive
pamphlet you can bet I will read it.
I do not want to go out in darkness.
I am doing everything I know to prevent this,

The shared information system
and each being at the end of its screen
emits an LED (light emitting diode) on an often
father up to the authorities. You blame your
did this to him. How do you think a person loses his mind?
He let someone take it.

He is sort of my mind and you are too,
God help me.
The green screen is an ingenious discovery.
You can record events in a studio before the screen
and then key in whatever environment you like.
but it can be blue too.

The experience of things is determined by our
feelings about them. Information is colored
by us. You may see remotely, in a photograph
for instance, the image of an ambush victim.
Maybe it is a war and/or she is caught naked.

Some people will hate the state of things that made her
so alone and vulnerable but few will do anything about it.
How do you find her? What guns surround her country?
And after all, maybe she would hate it.
To have to feel grateful to someone moved by her humiliation.
She may only be thinking about humiliation.

That is a tough feeling to shake.
Then, and I need not go too far into this,
then there are those who see the pain of someone
and they just love it. This may have something
to do with a revenge sentiment over their own unclosed wound.
and they cannot forgive. This is only information,
in the form of speculation.

Some feelings you get when you consider
the situation to secure yourself from the (negative) condition of it.
and its projections. The things in the stomach
affect what goes on in the head. On the web
many people make money with miracle potions.

Some curb the human appetite.
Some say you can lose while consuming whatever you want.
I heard the other girl refer to me as a skull.
She was very angry and did not look or say hello.
There is a prevalent competitive notion
that each only has one place. That her face is only

Obviously I am not. I write and read and
then roll on. I wear an ordinary human face,
some could compare me to a bird of prey
because my nose is hooked and my fingers are long
and I like to ride my bicycle with the wind at my back.
I am not here to attack.

You are also a mutant.
Do you think you can keep the heavy metals outside of you?
Do you think you can go to sleep here
and wake up the same?
The screen is framed by plastic,
beneath that you use words to issue commandments
or call-outs.

Most people use the web to send messages
to people who are already their friends.
They make arrangements for later and
detail what happened in the past.
This information may be not true.
The web cannot know intention.
It records and is open to influence.

People make money through advertisements,
if ads make money, that is more difficult
to know unless there are special offers.
The web is full of special offers and 30-day
trials. If you fall for those, or I should say,
if you respond to the offer

what often happens is that your information
is shared with other companies who will fill your inbox
with offers (that which is known as spam).
Because you are someone who wants to look great
and there are other companies with products compatible
with your stated desire. Ways for you to achieve
the prevailing notion of beauty.

It is my job to tell you the models
are selected because they are physically improbable.
They are elevated to be made desirable.
Their desirability is physical because they are models.
If it were easy to be like that, they would not
be sought-after by manufacturers.
Generally, working people need to be sturdy.

Advertisers want to make money.
They go with psychology and so create a sort of
self-rejection by advocating forms not reflected in most people.
They know that people will pay in to be of an elevated form
no matter what station they are from.
Everyone wants to be beautiful.
Everyone wants to be the agreed-upon beautiful thing.

Probably everyone is beautiful somewhere inside
if not outside. You can create an excellent argument
for your being and improve upon ability. That is my opinion.
If you live alone, you may know how great the web can be.
On it there is information and pornography.
Information includes
the prospects.

Pornography is the biggest industry in America.
It is designed to bring about a certain state
of arousal, generally, couched in anger
Pornography is addictive for many.
Of course, sometimes people want to touch, to hear a voice

to imagine a partner and what they can do together.
The web has many dating services. My ex-psychiatrist
advised me against trying them.
She had transferred the daughter role onto me.
I do appreciate the dangers of strangers.
I am prepared with the information that pictures
are not people in both obvious and non-obvious ways.

I know at least three people who have been in love
with people they met online.
Each one is intelligent and down-to-earth.
that the early questions are essential.
That and no expectation and somehow you have
to withhold your own personal information.

That is, until you meet up in a non-threatening place.
You will have to have someone know where you are,
a point person. And you will need a defense; mace, for instance
or a rape whistle or a dog leashed nearby
or in the car.
It will be important for him or her to know you have a dog.
They should meet each other as soon as possible.

This is the magic of the machine.
The meeting and love trial and,
if it works, the love made.
Well, that really is amazing.
Objectively amazing.
And good for the machine.
Good for the machine.

The electric web courses heavily through me.
This may be how we make history:
we can put up our movies, our words, or costume dramas.
We say we are so and so
and people follow the saga.
Do you ever get the problem which is opposite
to the problem of the watcher?

Have you ever only seen yourself through other people?
thought processes transferred through them?
I should look up the word rubric again.
That and lacuna and devi.
In the thrift store nobody looked at me.

A celestial being: what we all are.
True she might have meant devil.
I am not a devil.
I love my friends most of the time.
My friend sends me pictures
of jackrabbits and frogs.

Yesterday, he said he saw buttercups, a type of flower.
You go over the tracks first, on the other side of the river

and there they are.

At Samoa, hardly unpacked, I commenced planting,

Tomatoes and bush lima beans here and there
And yearn for a pet on a string. And I built the pig-house.

As fast as we eat them, we plant the tops.
The kitchen a shack near the house. I made bread in the rain.

October, 1890. I have been here nearly a month;
Put in corn, peas, onions, radishes, lettuce. Lima beans
Carruthers gave me mint root and grenadilla
Like a bouquet; he delivered a load of trees,
Then rounded off the afternoon sowing Indian corn.

My hurt healed by its cause, I go on planting.

No one else works much. The natives take it easy;
Mr. Carruthers and I picked a site for the kitchen garden.

I was planting a new lot of corn and pumpkin
I set them out as I talked to him on the way home.
I confided to Louis, a puff of the sweetest scent
Blows back as I cast away a handful of so-called weeds!

I clean out the potatoes, which had rotted in their hills.
Of course, RLS is not idle; he is writing A Footnote to History:
How the great powers combine to carve up these islands.

I discovered the ylang-ylang tree: a base for perfume,
Though it suggested to me the odor of boots.
Another tree is scented like pepper and spice,
And one terrible tree, I am forced to say,
Smells like ordure ... It nearly made me ill.
Breadfruit is plentiful. I found a banana grove,
Began clearing it instantly, and worked till I was dizzy.

The garden looks like a graveyard: beds shaped like tombs.
For not growing it. But behold! in the hedge
Still, I will fall to brooding before the mirror,
He is forty today. I am ten years his senior.

On the cleared land, the green mummy-apple,
Male and female, is springing up everywhere.
Came with a shipment from Sydney; also eleven

All fall I am cursed with asthma, rheumatics, a painful ear.
Louis describes it divinely to Henry James.
I set out one precious rhubarb plant, pause to gloat

I rise up from my furrow, knuckle smooth my brow
Louis insisted on going to Sydney, fell ill again.

Louis describes to me endless vivid deeps:

None perfect, a thousand tongues, all broken,
A thousand hands, all with scratching nails ...
High among joys, I place this delight of weeding,

They mimic his name till it seems, he says,
But the rain continues to fall on birds and weeds.
Mrs. S. gave me some nuts, and went back to Australia.

Avocados grow at a rate that is almost frightening.
Coconuts too. I read about Stanley and Livingstone.
Stanley the remedy. Instead, I made perfume.
The servants feared devils, so I planted the orange grove alone.

For two months I misplaced this diary ...
War is in the air, talk of killing all whites.
And a radish that turns into a turnip when it grows up.

The relatives had a terrible row. Mrs. S. refused
To pray with the servants. I threw up my hands!

My diary entries grow farther and farther apart.
In pain again, from an aneurysm inside my head ...
Three hundred seeds in baskets broke through the ground.

Four kinds of cabbage are doing very well.
Points out a weed which makes excellent eating
Cooked like asparagus. I shall try it very soon.
I refuse to see him. I am tired of the Claxtons.

The political situation grows grim. I rage at Louis
Throbbing, turns to my American son
To say he may drink to the President afterward
If he likes. I am writing this down
Hoping Louis will see it later, and be ashamed
Of his childishness and bad taste. (This will be erased.)

So now we are blazing with cacao fever,
The verandah tracked with mud, and the cacao litter.
Joe, my son-in-law, planted his thousandth tree today.

The jelly from berries out of the bush is delicious;
I plant cabbage by moonlight, set out more cacao.

I found a heap of old bones in a bush near the sty;
Louis gave the bones a funeral and a burial.

A series of hurricanes: Louis writes to The Times
Southern Cross cabbage, eggplant, sweet potato
David Balfour, is growing. I wrote nothing
The Samoan princes are getting nearer to war.

In a spectacular way. Belle is divorcing him.
Austin, my grandson, is in school in Monterey.
Belle and I go on sketching expeditions
To the hostile Samoan camps, stop in town for ginger beer.

Mr. Haggard begged us to stay in town
Because he bitterly wanted women to protect.
I suggested to him that I and my daughter

(The custom is to return them to the bereaved).
He washed it off and discovered it was his brother.

Kissing it, bathing it with his tears. A scandal arose
Because the heads of three girls have been taken as well
(Unheard of before in Samoa), returned wrapped in silk to their kin.
Between their teeth, cut in the semblance of heads.

I stopped writing this. Too hysterical with migraine.
Louis works on his masterpiece, The Weir of Hermiston.
So they might enjoy his glorious talk in London,

Later: At six, Louis helped with the mayonnaise,
To the top of the mountain. They will dig his grave.

I will have pretty gardens wherever I am,
Never again succumb to the fever of planting.

Before the days of self service,
when you never had to pump your own gas,
I was the one who did it for you, the girl
who stepped out at the sound of a bell
with a blue rag in my hand, my hair pulled back
in a straight, unlovely ponytail.
This was before automatic shut-offs
and vapor seals, and once, while filling a tank,
I hit a bubble of trapped air and the gas
backed up, came arcing out of the hole
belly and legs. And I had to hurry
back to the booth, the small employee bathroom
with the broken lock, to change my uniform,
peel the gas-soaked cloth from my skin
and wash myself in the sink.
Light-headed, scrubbed raw, I felt
glazed my flesh, the searing,
subterranean pain of it, how my skin
shimmered and ached, glowed
like rainbowed oil on the pavement.
I was twenty. In a few weeks I would fall,
for the first time, in love, that man waiting
patiently in my future like a red leaf
on the sidewalk, the kind of beauty
that asks to be noticed. How was I to know
it would begin this way: every cell of my body
burning with a dangerous beauty, the air around me
a nimbus of light that would carry me
through the days, how when he found me,
weeks later, he would find me like that,
an ordinary woman who could rise
in flame, all he would have to do
is come close and touch me.

Father: 

Son: 
But sure. I can already tell
From no felt, had, and wholly known things.

Father: 
You must let me tell you what you fear
You are afraid of time and its slow drip,
Like melting ice, like smoke upon the air
Because its name is death. But you can stop
Time as it dribbles from you, drop by drop.

Son: 

Father: 
That is the first of all its menaces,
All of us always are turning away
To one indeterminate nothing.

Son:
I question the sentiment you give to me,
I would be sudden now and rash in joy,
As if I lived forever, the future my toy.
Time is a dancing fire at twenty-one,
Powerful at the wheel of a motor-car,
Not thinking of death which is foreign and far.

Father: 
See the evasions which so many don,
The one anonymous in the audience,
The one expressionless in the subway,
Separate from actor and act, a member
Of public opinion, never involved.
At the band concert, Hawaii
Because one is afraid to be alone,
But there is a stay. You can stop
Time as it dribbles from you, drop by drop.

Son: 
Now I am afraid. What is there to be known?

Father: 
Guilt, guilt of time, nameless guilt.
Your actual will. Stand in mastery,
Keeping time in you, its terrifying mystery.
Face yourself, constantly go back
To what you were, your own history.
You are always in debt. Do not forget
Pleasure immediate as drink, but takes
The travail of building, patience with means.
The ideal which is with us like the sky ...

Son: 
Because of that, some laugh, and others cry.

Father: 
Returns with its memories, always, always,
The phoenix with eight hundred thousand memories!

Son: 
What must I do that is most difficult?

Father: 
You must, like one in an old play,
Hanging from the fiftieth-story ledge,
When the news is certain, surpassing fear,
The irreducible wish, world without end.

Son: 
I cannot partake of your difficult vision.

Father: 
Hamlet is the example; only dying
Done with revery.
Your own self acts then, then you know.

Son: 
My father has taught me to be serious.

Father: 
Be guilty of yourself in the full looking-glass.
I lift your body to the boat  
before you drown or choke or slip too far  

what I did like the physics  

year-old arms, between your life  

jacket and your bobbing frame, pushing you,  
like a fountain cherub, up and out.  

the gash on my thigh, sliced wide and clean  

by an errant screw on the stern.  

My arms strain  
against our deaths to hold you up  

as I lift you, crying, reaching, to the boat.

Out of a high meadow where flowers
bloom above cloud, come down;
pursue me with reasons for smiling without malice.

Bring mimic pride like that of the seedling fir,
surprise in the perfect leg-stems
and queries unstirred by recognition or fear
pooled in the deep eyes.

Come down by regions where rocks
lift through the hot haze of pain;
down landscapes darkened, crossed
by the rift of death-shock; place print
of a neat hoof on trampled ground
where not one leaf or root
remains unbitten; but come down
always, accompany me to the morass
of the decaying mind. There

I need more time, a simple day in Paris hotels and window shopping.
The croissants will not bake themselves and the Tower of London would
Like to spend a night in the tropics with gray sassy paint. It has many
Wounds and historic serial dreams under contract to Hollywood.
Who will play the head of Mary, Queen of Scots, and who will braid her

Hair? Was it she who left her lips on the block for the executioner,
Whose hands would never find ablution, who would never touch a woman
Again or eat the flesh of a red animal? Blood pudding would repulse him
Until joining Anne. That is the way of history written for Marlow and
Shakespear. They are with us now that we are sober and wiser,

Not taking the horrors of poetry too seriously. Why am I telling you this
Nonsense, when I have never seen you sip your coffee or tea,
In the morning? Not to mention,
Never heard you sing, although some claim it is quite grand.
Will you teach me to sing like Chaliapin? Will I impress you with my

Cartoon Russian accent? I like sour cream and borsht;
We went to school together. My minor was caviar and blinis.
This is what it means to listen to Boris Godunov late at night.
But why should we speak in a foreign language to each other,

We are not birds. I have other stories too strange and beautiful to be
Told. They have no sound or memory. They will rest on your lips when
You bring your hands to your mouth to stop their gush of air against your
Face. We should go back and meet again at the street fair of cufflinks.
Our hearts teach us how to fly with wings of pain.

That is the price of the disarticulated lessons we should not abstain from
Playing. The accumulated misdemeanors add up to the most egregious
Felony: ignoring the demands of the heart. We remain in abeyance to
The muses who are only interested in their outcomes,
We are just the worms on their hooks of selfishness.

What do they care, we are not Greek. We are just a dream of pleasant
Comic arias that suffice as whims in the morning.
We are small enemies to them with strange large hearts that control the
Weather in the heavens. They cannot change or unteach us not to
Trespass their quarters of endowment. Perhaps, after all, you are an

Affable spirit bubbling over with your own deductions to minimize the
Pointed dots in your beautiful endeavors.
Although I feel like a bird with a broken wing,
Each day I think of you I fumble an attempt to fly to impress you with
The color of my paper wings.

When we go out into the fields of learning
We go by a rough route
Marked by colossal statues, Frankenstein's
Monsters, AMPAC and the 704,
AARDVARK, and deoxyribonucleic acid.
They guard the way.
Headless they nod, wink eyeless,
Thoughtless compute, not heartless,
For they figure us, they figure
Our next turning.
They are reading the book to be written.
As we start out
At first daylight into the fields, they are saying,
Starting out.

In every sage leaf is contained a toad
Infinitely small.

Carbonized grains of wheat unearthed
From the seventh millennium B.C. town of Jarmo
In the Tigris-Euphrates basin
Match the grains of three kinds of wheat still extant,
Two wild, one found only in cultivation.
The separate grains
Were parched and eaten,
Or soaked into gruel, yeasted, fermented.
Took to the idea of bread,
Ceres, while you were gone.
Wind whistles in the smokey thatch,
Oven browns its lifted loaf,
And in the spring the nourished seeds,
Hybrid with wild grass,
Easily open in a hundred days,
And seeded fruits, compact and dry,
Store well together.
They make the straw for beds,
They ask the caring hand to sow, the resting foot
To stay, to court the seasons.

Basil: hatred: king over pain.

What did you do on the last day of day camp?
First we did games, running around and playing.
Then we did crafts, making things.
Then we did nature, what goes on and on.
Eventually a number
Of boys have got big enough
Through all the hazards of drag-racing, theft, and probation,
To start for junior college, two transfers away,
Mysterious as Loch Ness.
While of grandmothers a number
Have stooping arrived to seventy or eighty
And wave the boys on, shaking
With more absentminded merriment than they have mustered
In half a century.

King Henry the Eighth consumed many daisies
In an attempt to rid himself of ulcers.

Algebra written across a blackboard hurts
As a tight shoe hurts; it can't be walked in.
Music, a song score, hurts,
How far lies one note from another?
Graft hurts, its systems of exploitation
In cold continuance.
Argosies of design, fashions to which the keys
Rest restlessly in an Egyptian tomb.

In every sage leaf is contained a toad
Infinitely small.

He was too excited to fall asleep.
He took out his gun.
He took out his handkerchief.
He took out his notebook.
He drank his coffee and left a dime.
He walked into the room.
He took her in his arms.
She let him in and walked out of the room.
He ran down the escalator.

He left the motor running.
He waited in the rain.
He needed something to tell the police.
He went down unconscious.
The blood drained from his face.
His eyes melted into a smile.
He dialed and waited, looking around.
He took off his hat in the elevator.
He rang the doorbell and waited.
He poured the cereal and added milk.

He opened the refrigerator and looked in.
He turned the page and continued reading.
He shut the door and switched the light on.
He looked up at a plane in the sky.
He put three pennies one on top of another.
He squeezed onto the elevator.
He took out his key.
He helped her into her coat.
He crossed the room and picked up the phone.
He drove on through the heavy rain.

He whistled for a cab.
He turned the corner and bumped into her.
She gradually surrendered to his kiss.
He drove past the wrought-iron gates.
He lit a cigarette and waited.
He lied to the police.
He threw the dice and won.
He folded the newspaper and crossed his legs.
He sat down in the lobby.
He tied his shoes and stood up.

He thought about her until he fell asleep.
He threw the dice and lost.
He dialed and waited for her to answer.
He left some money for her.
He looked for her door number.
The police arrived late.
He walked into her building.
He let her do the explaining.

He gave up hope and begged.
He locked his car and walked.
She gave him that look of hers.
He put a finger to his lips.
He wiped his mouth and left.
He slapped her across the face hard.
He lit a cigarette in the dark.
Her little dog slept.
Her voice had an edge to it.

Her hands were wonderful when she touched him.
His mind might be playing tricks on him.
The low hills reminded him of her.
There was no way to cut his losses.
He needed a shave and a haircut.
The coffee did nothing for him.
She was somewhere else when he called.
Pain stabbed him as he reached toward the glove compartment.
He needed a little time in the desert.
He decided to head for the beach and then thought better.

He needed about $5,000.
He ran out of Luckies and crumpled the pack.
He left his hat on in the car.
Maybe he was ready to die.
He checked his wallet pocket.
All of his friends had disappeared.
He remembered her naked body.
He had almost no savings.
He was at least ten pounds overweight.
He realized he was in love with her.

One of the spectators is disappointed
the beaching, the scientists busy
cutting into ninety-four pilot whales
stranded on the salt grass.
No one knows why and, try as the rescue team
might, not one whale will go back to water.
lined up like lumber and sawed into,
except when the black skin splits
what parasite or geomagnetic anomaly
finished their love of motion. Why should
anything have to leave this world
when water can cycle from atmosphere
down to land, the ocean and back
to forgiving sky.
where my father has a little vegetation
describes it, trying to minimize
the danger of him slipping
into a haze so cold, some nights,
his plate to his mouth.
slowing me down. The same water
fattened into snow in the woods
of my childhood, the whiteness
unbroken except where my father
cut trails and taught me to ski,
laying down the herringbone behind him
as he broke up hills that left me
with legs made of slush. He wanted me strong,
no patience for pain. No choice
but to find the muscle to follow. Even now
when he boasts how I zigzagged
the breakneck hills in an icestorm,
slats skittering out of control,
each run a victory of luck more than will,
each ride up the lift a prayer for my bones.
I wonder how it is for him now
beached, spectators came like pilgrims,
each new arrival scanning the faces
of those heading back to their cars
to see how it changed them
to survey so much death. Nothing showed.
Their eyes followed the asphalt,
heads bent in private devotion.
where others have died, my father
keeps a record of each test and drug.
He watches medicine drip into his arm
and circle in the dark of his blood.
I believe it will heal him, as I believe
in the strength of my blood
to protect me from failures of will. Once
when my grandmother at ninety-six
lay delirious with pneumonia,
pitching on her high horsehair bed,
she saw three crows perched on the dresser.
Please, open the window. Let them out.
It was my father who did what she asked.
And the crows flew out, carrying her fever
over the treeline, dissolving into sky,
and she lived. Whatever she saw,
by love, luck or dumb Yankee will,

The women bow and flutter in the field. 
Summer is dark, as in the ancient time. 

Has darkened now, as in the ancient time, 
And clouds are still at dawn on the soft mountains. 

The stir of boughs has warned us, 
Fruit in the grass reminds us . . . 

But thirst. When we entered the towns 
We stayed to hear their dangerous low voices. 

By night the leaves are years 
And distant each one in that silvered dark. 
Or mothers risen infamous from the grave. 

In the void ether, visions 
Famished through interminable dark, 
Trembling in single wonder of themselves. 

We knew we were alone upon that water; 
Or on long fields in a leaf-blowing autumn, 
Lonely under the high kick, toward the tackle 
Bitter turf our vision, so alone there 
Waiting for pain in the numb fracture, listened. 

Always to question a still room ourselves: 
When winter lifted her cool beams 
Till waking tendons netted us alive. 

Head reared into the morning. 

And in cold mirrors our deep eyes, 
Familiars of starlight, curious 
Interpreters of the sun, the fire and clear 
Waterlights of noon upon our walls: 
Webs for the spring of shadow. 
So hurt, so sorry, so angry, so ashamed . . . 

Avid, delicate harlots: those pale ones 
Impaled on phalloi in a pantomime 
Wriggled a squealing answer to our love. 

We sat on our two bones and we were blind. 
Glowed in the time-drift 
Small as a minuet-whisper and as dear. 
Mowers on many lawns, leveling summer, 
Measured the slow festival of the air; 

Or in bright gusts of winter by the door, 
Our mothers in their ceremonial furs, 
This image or another bound in thought 
With scent of old spoons, handkerchiefs and roses. 

Removed us from their rooms. 

Plains were a long gaze and a sigh from hills. 

We moved there always in the northern weather, 
Briefly together or alone, 
Under us, the fiery power sound 
Swelling the road backward. Against glass 
And starlings rising in stillness on meadowlands. 

Or walked upon an aerodrome in our dream 
Their wings sighing home. 

Riding with dark engines depth of wind, 
Sea lay, quicksilver, eastward, and a sail 
Perched like the white pinch of a butterfly . . . 

Over the dials our enormous hands . . . 

Under their curtains icy air. We swam 
Against the snowfields like a scarecrow. 
Cars were steaming in that gash of light, 
Memoried evening and the cypress shades: 

In their streets wandered, listening to the flutist who loved 
His single note, sweet in the russet shuffle 
Or slowly in the evening dust and gold 
Such courtesy, not gross enough for time . . . 

heard sea-music and the slap of seas; 
Odysseus, our father, wanderer; 
Unkindly glory from the islands, 
When in her temple the wind lifted 
Above the shy sandals, shadowed dance . . . 

Organs raging, Holy, Holy, Holy, 
Far off on a low violet imagined land. 

Legends of their lord Christ: they were strange men. 

The child caught in the glass: unhistoried years 

Where no leaf burned but sundown in his hall, 

Of evil rising in the shade of war, 
Dissolving shining things . . . dissolving 
The young men on their benches into death. 

Slowly pacing the gutters 

I like to touch your tattoos in complete
where they are, know by heart the neat
lines of lightning pulsing just above
your nipple, can find, as if by instinct, the blue
swirls of water on your shoulder where a serpent
twists, facing a dragon. When I pull you

and quiet on the sheets, I love to kiss
or turns to pain between us, they will still
be there. Such permanence is terrifying.
So I touch them in the dark; but touch them, trying.

1

The question is: how does one hold an apple
Who likes apples

And how does one handle
Filth? The question is

How does one hold something
In the mind which he intends

To grasp and how does the salesman
Hold a bauble he intends

To sell? The question is
When will there not be a hundred

Poets who mistake that gesture
For a style.

2

The little hole in the eye
Williams called it, the little hole

Has exposed us naked
To the world

And will not close.

Blankly the world
Looks in

And we compose
Colors

And the sense

Of home
And there are those

In it so violent
And so alone

They cannot rest.

3

Sing like a bird at the open
Sky, but no bird

Like the grip
Of the Roman hand
On his shoulder, the certainties

Of place
And of time

Held him, I think
With the pain and the casual horror
Of the iron and may have left
No hope of doubt

Whereas we have won doubt
From the iron itself

And hope in death. So that
If a man lived forever he would outlive
Hope. I imagine open sky

Over Gethsemane,
Surely it was this sky.

4

Impossible to doubt the world: it can be seen
And because it is irrevocable

It cannot be understood, and I believe that fact is lethal

And man may find his catastrophe,
His Millennium of obsession.

a stone on a stone,
something balanced momentarily, in time might the lion

Lie down in the forest, less fierce
And solitary

Than the world, the walls
Of whose future may stand forever.

5

I, says the buzzard,

Mind

Has evolved
Too long

Also is not good

For us
Unless like the fool

Persisting
In his folly

It may rescue us
As only the true

Might rescue us, gathered
In the smallest corners

O small boy,
To be born;

On whom his parents have not smiled

No god thinks worthy of his table,

Follow your saint, follow with accents sweet;
Haste you, sad notes, fall at her flying feet.
There, wrapp'd in cloud of sorrow, pity move,
And tell the ravisher of my soul I perish for her love:
But if she scorns my never-ceasing pain,
Then burst with sighing in her sight and ne'er return again.

  All that I sung still to her praise did tend,
Still she was first; still she my songs did end;
Yet she my love and music both doth fly,
The music that her echo is and beauty's sympathy.
Then let my notes pursue her scornful flight:
It shall suffice that they were breath'd and died for her delight.

Thank Heaven! the crisis,
    The danger, is past,
And the lingering illness
And the fever called "Living"
    Is conquered at last.

Sadly, I know
    I am shorn of my strength,
And no muscle I move
    I am better at length.

And I rest so composedly,
    Now, in my bed,
That any beholder
Might start at beholding me,
    Thinking me dead.

The moaning and groaning,
    The sighing and sobbing,
Are quieted now,
    With that horrible throbbing
    Horrible throbbing!

Have ceased, with the fever
With the fever called "Living"
    That burned in my brain.

And oh! of all tortures
That torture the worst
    Torture of thirst
For the naphthaline river
I have drank of a water

Of a water that flows,
    With a lullaby sound,
From a spring but a very few
From a cavern not very far
    Down under ground.

And ah! let it never
    Be foolishly said
That my room it is gloomy
    And narrow my bed;
For man never slept
And, to sleep, you must slumber
    In just such a bed.

My tantalized spirit
    Here blandly reposes,
Forgetting, or never
Its old agitations
    Of myrtles and roses:

For now, while so quietly
    Lying, it fancies
A holier odor
A rosemary odor,
With rue and the beautiful
    Puritan pansies.

And so it lies happily,
    Bathing in many
A dream of the truth
Drowned in a bath
    Of the tresses of Annie.

She tenderly kissed me,
    She fondly caressed,
And then I fell gently
Deeply to sleep
    From the heaven of her breast.

When the light was extinguished,
    She covered me warm,
And she prayed to the angels
To the queen of the angels
    To shield me from harm.

And I lie so composedly,
    Now, in my bed,
(Knowing her love)
And I rest so contentedly,
    Now in my bed
(With her love at my breast).
That you shudder to look at me,

But my heart it is brighter
    Than all of the many
Stars in the sky,
It glows with the light
With the thought of the light
    Of the eyes of my Annie.

I love her fierceness when she fights me, 
shouting "Not fair!" Her eyes slitting 
like shutters in cities by the sea. 
fires that burn through the turning years 
bringing her to life again, and again, in a miracle of smoke. 
she kisses my back, capriciously, when I scold her. 
Maybe she recalls the scalpel by which she was born. 
Easy, the mark of its slash in my skin. 
She rose from my belly as I slept. We're bound together 
by peace, no shrieks of pain, and my modesty. 
We're a canvas by Giovanni Bellini: a virgin and a sweet rabbit.

i was left out
i was chosen second & then left out
i was left
was the second in
without direction

residue of
scar
when we rubbed our
chests together

hello in there, brother, can you

you were my
coming
eat her vegetables, she better chew) choo
choo

what's bitter between us

got a job
i don't know where you're
buried

what do you
do have mouths &
where that came from

asked me what's
her like something
& feed it
full

focuses & it's like looking at
both of us through a
window

facts of life for
you haven't been told
you're in your late
queer unable to

you live this
around this
better mother i

promise you that

How were we to know, leaving your two kids 
behind in New Hampshire for our honeymoon 
at twenty-one, that it was a trick of cheap 
hotels in New York City to draw customers 
like us inside by displaying a fancy lobby? 
Arriving in our fourth-floor room, we found 
a bed, a scarred bureau, and a bathroom door 
with a cut on one side the exact shape 
of the toilet bowl that was in its way 
when I closed it. I opened and shut the door, 
admiring the fit and despairing of it. You 
discovered the initials of lovers carved 
How wrong the place was to us then, 
unable to see the portents of our future 
disdain for those with little money, 
the carving of pain and love. Yet in that room 
we pulled the covers over ourselves and lay 
our love down, and in this way began our unwise 
and persistent and lucky life together. 

Did your father come home after fighting
through the week at work? Did the sweat change
to salt in his ears? Was that bitter white
you were quiet when other poets sang
you choked on the tonsil of Negro Duty?
Were there as many offices for pain
as love? Should a black man never be shy?
Was your father a mountain twenty
leaving a lone column of smoke? Was he
a black magnolia singing at your feet?
Was he a blackjack smashed against your throat?

a seven-letter skidmark that scars up  
across your chest, a flare of indelible script.  
Between Death or Glory, and Mama, she rages,  
scales the trellis of your rib cage;  
her red hair swings down to bracket your ankles, whip  
you sleepless with her afterimage,  

and each pinned and martyred limb aches for more.  
Her memory wraps you like a vise.  
How simple the pain that trails and graces  
bruises into wisdom you have no name for.

Of course there is a jackhammer. And a view, like Hopper,
herald of our powerlessness. Easy go, easy come: thwash,
the next day another, an example of everything that gets done
in the dark. Like the initiative of the crocuses from a snow 
that was, as it works out, warming them. Or in this case,
the strange October weather warming them. There were the
conclusions we jumped to. To which we jumped. There was
pain, and then there was suffering. Of course there was my
ambition to offer you the world, but one that I have rearranged 
to make sense. Here are all the sensations of being alive
another, here is the yellow next to the fathomless blue.

The things I cannot do

include to sleep,
to calm the spillway of the blood,

to face an auditorium,

with no sense of Vogue or the Baroque.

to tramp on grief, 

estrange pain,
and hatch the part of waking that is dreams,

double one dose to un-depress
and to write less and less

a chronicle of anxiety.

I spot-treat
a spate of addiction

in this faint dusk world 

a woman in her prime,
pilled together.
I look out the bars upon the Castle

There are spires of faith
in the invisible claws of spiders
in the flight and curve of gulls.
These know, I swear,
We sit, debating the charity of our captors.

At night lights come on
the shoreline bends into a broad bay
Yesterday it rained on the eve

Let me lead you into the country
It is only as half clansman
that I bring my song to the place of sacrifice
here in the pain fields
I lead
my rope is short.

I will stage a hundred fights in honor of our Gods
and our beloved leader
Here, I could care less for the toiling masses
I retreated here before Lent
to my own stretch of sea front
(I cannot see the damned sea
But the shore falls into a deep gulf

They found a week-old baby
buried in a shallow grave
on the front lawn of the fort.
I want my grave to be deeper.

They are sawing through our firewood
The flutist is silent
Perhaps his troops have arrived in Georgia

Not to arrive upsets me
And for the path that I have trod

A day without tears is a rare occurrence
practically an episode

when men still wore starched collars,
and stuffed cotton wool between their toes
but you would see faces that were worth a second look
those were years when something whispered

After the fierce midsummer all ablaze 
There come the mellow, mild, St. Martin days 
Crowned with the calm of peace, but sad with haze. 
Comes large-eyed friendship: with a restful gaze, 
He beckons us to follow, and across 
Why are we haunted with a sense of loss? 
We do not wish the pain back, or the heat; 
And yet, and yet, these days are incomplete.

new oddcouple friendship
raised many eyebrows

and basketball
some hungover blue blue

a doe-eyed girl, I was
trying to tell you a simple story
did you want me back

on Celebrity Apprentice
yes yes yes yes
a real human being

who let his guard down

while you sleep smothered
in stars, a foreign city
not the dirtbag

you fight to shrug off inside
he says that

this tattooed body
sheltered in a solar cave

do my best across
two thousand miles

constantly having shrugged off
this new sense of vulnerability
like seeing Peggy at nineteen weeks

even small miscalculations
die deep in the earth,

what in the world between us
that negative sun

another way of saying
white tendrils cast

nuclear winter keeps trying

//
((quickly ((quickly pull together

heightened fears

the new dear leader fends off assassins

the world / disaster of misunderstood longings
((strange duration

am I capable

touching his eyelid, chin, upper lip
where the tooth went through
and there

brightness)

a human region, not a geophysical one

draws a mark
to make a horizon, if
only to see you again

			TPY-2
			Arleigh-Burke
			Aegis

my side aches, how it all speaks to me
can my attention deliver it

more tremors, a biting pain

five days, no sky appears

latest successful test of
unspoken boundaries
furthers silence,

toward fabric softener,
mold sweeping the hallways
I have to stand seven hours a day

I want to be known to you
the world over
The day glared, breathless: an eye socket.
Clouds barely shifted, and the opal sky
was sheared into dry-dazzling millions.
Yet fall in, the sky, it did not.
The mail did not go undelivered,
dogs were walked; lovers fell savagely
out of and in love, and all between.

Seven concussed days, his draft longhand
swaying like supple pillars of gray flame,
erasures; in the long nights his desk lamp
revealed the window streaked with chalk
sweated off the fen, which was England.

hindered by the little lion kneading
his lap. Later, the papers howling
of guignol ambush would milk
his delighting spleen as the rectory
self-veiled in evensong and dusk.

Somewhere over an inexpressive sea
of rain-sleek tiles, the contemptible
perfection of gardens, perhaps up
from the weird moonlike muteness
and felt absences, it came winging.
He died without dread or pain.
A sour storm rides the Levant,
rinsing the domeless yellow streets.

On the steep road to Worms Ash
the coverts take the tincture
of foxgloves, where the shade
of Housman, deadly-formal kink
still running through him, fidgets
among the cinder-like moths.
Hill makes his way to Pisgah.

    
   

i
came
close to his
& a FAT tear shared
animal PAIN sloshed &
were born a dog &
,

like a clue
we found PEOPLE
in the KITCHEN
in the SUICIDE VEST
with the KALASHNIKOV

such beautiful, desperate weapons
their faces

had to be covered
piteously
with the self-same wretchedness
we see in mirrors

a worryingly familiar scene
the carnage
going on
behind closed doors

but is it true
you only get one shot
when you get a loaded magazine
& plenty more
where that came from
in the MUNITIONS DEPOT
which I picture in Arizona, right
beside a render farm
and to the left
THE CLOUD
that backs up
and up and up
up
to where
are there edges, Bobby?

INTELLIGENCE tells us
to test the power of names
by naming things, for one thing
to name is to guarantee the end
like a starting pistol
BANG

4

I am so indifferent
to the limits
of feelings
every time someone lifts my flap
the unwashed salad
the unheated leftovers
the sanitary products are standard
but bear no relation
to what I expected
to feel overlaid
with various forms of filth
like getting wrapped in a dog towel
and buried in the hardening ground
under the Canadian maple? Do dogs
need to approach death
and back away from it
like I did when the vet injected
deep pentobarbital & his bowels
ejected across the floor tiles
I was there
to inhale his fur and weep
for my benefit
I am not independent
of my feelings this way
of talking about feelings
has fooled each one of us
when there are fewer words around
my arms around
his only
adored and stinking
dead
throw me in there with him everything is
in the cold
and without good reason
still here and

feelings

6 JUST A GENTLE REMINDER

A LOT OF WORK
is just this and that
but it seemed, for a moment, that a new
climax had been won when
even the sky fingered me
with a slobbery insistence when
we were retching with so much desire
we created a whole new atmosphere
using the sick bag to be actually sick in
now the shower curtain is transparent
to have this experience
so that we are more alike
like a sign that life struck once
in a slippy-bits marathon
that began when our eyes were magnets
crotches at a picnic
when it was essential
to make every enhancement
beside the Bluetooth wireless speaker system
until even the trees had to dash inside
while I choked up playing the scene, as we lived it,
united by our pursuit of arrhythmia or
satisfying itches to that
catchy bridge section in Chopin
with Chopin through his melancholic meadow
(not that I approve of background music
(I prefer to foreground the piano
by massaging it loud and all over
until the top layer comes off in my hand
and the pedal squeaks for humanity
(I like to FEEL a piano as an instrument
of interruption and consciousness
(though I also like to take light swims, to get away
from what I FEEL (today I felt
jelly beans resemble kidneys))))))
which throbs like everyone grieving
7 HERE, HAVE A NEW PUPPY

said the Russians to the French
to soften the dog-loss
is the greater likeness
except we never seem to run out of images
sometimes something in an image
runs through me and that is very common
as is reading about something
until I know someone outside of me
without any knowledge
it is a test for my knowledge
to hang around until morning
practically all mornings are news to me
practically all knowledge is news to me
will remember later, like a loving son,
how the old man lay down to sleep
in the drift of wheat outside the window.
He who has opened the eyes of the age,
two large sleepy apples with inflamed lids,
hears forever after the roar of rivers
swollen with the wasted, lying times.
The age is a despot with two sleepy apples
to see with, and a splendid mouth of earth.
I know the breath growing weaker by the day
Not long not till the simple song
of the wrongs of earth is cut off,
and a tin seal put on the lips.
O life of earth! O dying age!
but the man with the helpless smile
of one who has lost himself.
O the pain of peeling back the raw eyelids
to look for a lost word, and with lime
slaking in the veins, to hunt
for night herbs for a tribe of strangers!
After all these years the snow still smells of apples.
I want to run away from my own doorstep,
and my conscience glitters ahead of me
like salt strewn on the pavement.
through the back lanes, past thatched eaves, starling houses,
an everyday passer-by, in a flimsy coat,
forever trying to button the lap-robe.
Street after street flashes past,
the frozen runners crunch like apples;
it keeps slipping out of my fingers.
The winter night thunders
like iron hardware through the Moscow streets.
Knocks like a frozen fish, or billows in steam,
flashing like a carp in a rosy tea-room.
Moscow is Moscow again. I say hello to her.
I still respect the brotherhood
Beautiful winter, and the goat sky
has crumbled into stars and is burning with milk.
And the lap-robe flaps and rings
like horse-hair against the frozen runners.
And the lanes smoked like kerosene stoves,
swallowed snow, raspberry, ice,
endlessly peeling, like a Soviet sonatina,
recalling nineteen-twenty.
The frost is smelling of apples again.
Could I ever betray to gossip-mongers
the great vow to the Fourth Estate
and oaths solemn enough for tears?
Who else will you kill? Who else will you worship?
What other lie will you dream up?
But the simple sonatina of typewriters
is only a faint shade of those great sonatas.

Cold wind comes out of the white hills 
with an esophogeal vowel sound, 
and a loneliness creeps 
into the conversation by the hot tub. 

keep rising from the surface of the water 
to wrap themselves around a sculpted 
clavicle or wrist. 

the eighth story of the world 
looking out through glass and steel 
with a clarity of vision 
in which imported coffee and 
a knowledge of French painting 

but that we are atop a pyramid 
the truck that hauled the fuel, 
the artery of highway 
blasted through the mountains, 

that failed to save him, 
the successful development of tourism, 

the roads continue to be built; 
in anticipation of the next strong gust. 

simply to kiss someone 
or to open your mouth 
someone is raising to your lips, 

not to enjoy.

Twenty-eight shotgun pellets
crater my thighs, belly and groin.
I gently thumb each burnt bead,
fingering scabbed stubs with ointment.

Could have neutered me, made extinct
the volatile, romantic man I am.
doctor at emergency room
I gave, when the doctor pressed my groin.
I could still make love, morphine drowsed me
police visiting my bed, or laughing so hard,
they scowled for a serious answer.
and they cursed and left.

Still smelling of milk udders,
I tied it to the truck rack and drove off.
Its hooves teethed
at pink roots
A magnificent bull.
Glowing wheel of heart
breathed brimming stream of white flame at dawn.
He wrangled his black brawn
like a battleshield to challenge the sun,
reared thick neck down and sideways,
lunged at me with dart and snort,
hoof-stamped and nostrilled dirt,
I respected his horns
and he the whistling
menace of willow.

One afternoon my cousin Patricio
usurp swollen sap
in his testicle sack. It withered
to a pink wattle and seeded
the garden to drive cornstalks
to bear hardy, golden horns.

Thereafter, he grazed the fenceline,
with the tempered lust and peaceful grace
of a celibate priest.
His bearing now arranged itself
elegant as a wild flower
sprung over night.

Perfecto shot it.
Rasping on a black rope of blood
round its neck, it staggered,
bouldering convulsions.
Blood exploding
in bright lash of earthquaked air,
second and third shots glowed
its death.

A quivering shadow of life-flame
darkened the air and it sputtered
a last drop of blood.
I drank long swigs
of whiskey and, thinking it was dead,
turned to walk away,
then

And the white moon was in the sky,
and I looked at the moon for a long time.

I sat on the ground
still warm in my throat.
A beautiful animal! I allowed to be butchered.
When it trounced and galloped in the field,
its body was a dark, windy cliff edge,
I grieved,
I wept drunkenly
that no one cared,

Perfecto, Valasquez and the butcher
tried to stop me
from driving,

Had to cross that bridge again.
Full of significance . . . tonight,
deepest part of flooded bridge was danger . . . drowning . . .
represented years of my life collapsed
and destroyed, water the cleansing element,
my ascent from had healed, onto firm ground,
but I went back, to re-live

Bug-eyes glazed
bewildered, then gray slits of lips
He withdrew in darkness a moment,
reappeared on porch, serrated saw of his voice
cut the chill dark,

First shot framed darkness round me
with a spillway of bright light,
eruption of sound, and second shot roared
a spray of brilliance and the third
gave an expanded halo-flash.
My legs woozed, and then
I buckled to the ground.

I groaned with the steer,
and crawled my dead legs
to the truck, lunged on elbows into the cab,
hand lifting the dead stone beneath my waist
to clutch and brake.

Following morning calls came,
I wanted peace,
wanted to diffuse the immovable core
of vengeance in my heart,
I had carried since a child,
dismantle the bloody wheel of violence
I had ridden since a child.

During my week in bed,
pellets pollinated me
with a forgotten peace,
and between waking thoughts of anger and vengeance,
sleep was a small meadow of light,
a clearing I walked into and rested. Fragrance of peace
filled me as fragrance
of flowers and dirt permeate hands
that work in the garden all day.

Curandero came to visit, and said,
Did you know that? Killing the bull,
is killing the intuitive part of yourself,
the feminine part. Did you realize,
when Jesus was raising Lazarus,
he groaned in his spirit and that bull groaned,
and when you killed the bull, it was raising you.
The dying bull gave birth to you and now you are either
is either going to drown you or liberate you,

I'm at a double wake
in Springfield, for a childhood
friend and his father
who died years ago. I join
my aunt in the queue of mourners
and walk into a brown study,
a sepia room with books
and magazines. The father's
in a coffin; he looks exhumed,
the worse for wear. But where
my friend's remains should be
there's just the empty base
of an urn. Where are his ashes?
His mother hands me
a paper cup with pills:
leucovorin, Zovirax,
wanted you to have these,"
she sneers. "Take all
you want, for all the good
snaps on. Raquel,
not Welch, the chubby
nurse, is standing by my bed.
It's 6 a.m., time to flush
the heplock and hook up
the I.V. line. False dawn
is changing into day, infusing
the sky above the Hudson
with a flush of light.
My roommate stirs
beyond the pinstriped curtain.
My first time here on G-9,
the AIDS ward, the cheery
D & D Building intentionality
of the decor made me feel
like jumping out a window.
I'd been lying on a gurney
in an E.R. corridor
for nineteen hours, next to
a psychotic druggie
with a voice like Abbie
Hoffman's. He was tied
up, or down, with strips
of cloth (he'd tried to slug
a nurse) and sent up
a grating adenoidal whine
all night. "Nurse . . . nurse . . .
untie me, please . . . these
rags have strange powers."
By the time they found
a bed for me, I was in
no mood to appreciate the clever
curtains in my room,
the same fabric exactly
as the drapes and sheets
of a P-town guest house
All I can remember is
the pattern. Nor did it
help to have the biggest queen
on the nursing staff
clap his hands delightedly
and welcome me to AIDS-land.
I wanted to drop
dead immediately. That
was the low point. Today
these people are my friends,
in the process of restoring
me to life a second time.
I can walk and talk
and breathe simultaneously
now. I draw a breath
and sing "Happy Birthday"
to my roommate Joe.
He's 51 today. I didn't think
he'd make it. Three weeks
ago they told him that he had
aplastic anemia, and nothing
could be done. Joe had been
a rotten patient, moaning
operatically, throwing chairs
at nurses. When he got
the bad news, there was
a big change. He called
the relatives with whom
he had been disaffected,
was anointed and communicated
for the first time since the age
of eight when he was raped
by a priest, and made a will.
As death drew nearer, Joe
grew nicer, almost serene.
Then the anemia
began to disappear, not
because of medicines, but
on its own. Ready to die,
it looks like Joe has more
of life to go. He'll go
home soon. "When will you
get out of here?" he asks me.
I don't know; when the X-ray
shows no more pneumonia.
I've been here three weeks
this time. What have I
accomplished? Read some
Balzac, spent "quality
time" with friends, come back
from death's door, and
prayed, prayed a lot.
Barry Bragg, a former
lover of a former
lover and a new
Episcopalian, has AIDS too,
and gave me a leatherbound
and gold-trimmed copy of the Office,
the one with all the antiphons.
My list of daily intercessions
is as long as a Russian
novel. I pray about AIDS
last. Last week I made a list
of all my friends who've died
or who are living and infected.
Every day since, I've remembered
someone I forgot to list.
This morning it was Chasen
Gaver, the performance poet
from DC. I don't know
if he's still around. I liked
him and could never stand
his poetry, which made it
difficult to be a friend,
although I wanted to defend
him one excruciating night
at a Folio reading, where
Chasen snapped his fingers
and danced around spouting
frothy nonsense about Andy
Warhol to the rolling eyes
of self-important "language-
centered" poets, whose dismissive
attitude and ugly manners
were worse by far than anything
that Chasen ever wrote.
Charles was his real name;
a classmate at Antioch
dubbed him "Chasen," after
the restaurant, I guess.
Once I start remembering,
so much comes back.
There are forty-nine names
on my list of the dead,
thirty-two names of the sick.
Cookie Mueller changed
lists Saturday. They all
will, I guess, the living,
I mean, unless I go
before them, in which case
to imagine so many people
I love dying, but no harder
than to comprehend so many
already gone. My beloved
Bobby, maniac and boyfriend.
Barry reminded me that he
on the coat pile at this Christmas
party, two years in a row.
together used to be, a lot
about driving in his debutante
from hole to hole of the golf course
at the poshest country club
in Birmingham at 3 a.m.,
or taking off his clothes
in the redneck bar on a dare,
or working on Stay Hungry
as the dresser of a then-
unknown named Schwarzenegger.
Who will be around to anthologize
his purple cracker similes:
that I remember have to do
with heat, Bobby shirtless,
sweating on the dance floor
of the tiny bar in what is now
a shelter for the indigent
with AIDS on the dockstrip,
stripping shirts off Chuck Shaw,
Barry Bragg and me, rolling
up the tom rags, using them
as pom-poms, then bolting
off down West Street, gracefully
The young man, hardly more
than a boy, who fired the shot
had looked at him with an air
not of anger but of concentration,
as if he were surveying a road,
or feeding a length of wood into a saw:
It had to be done just so.

The bullet passed through
his upper chest, below the collar bone.
The pain was not what he might
he staggered out of the pasture
and into a grove of trees.

He pressed and pressed
the wound, trying to stanch
the blood, but he could only press
what he could reach, and he could
not reach his back, where the bullet
had exited.
smelling the leaves and mosses,
musty and damp and cool
after the blaze of open afternoon.

How good the earth smelled,
as it had when he was a boy
hiding from his father,
who was intent of strapping him
for doing his chores
late one time too many.

A cowbird razzed from a rail fence.
It isn't mockery, he thought,
no malice in it. . . just a noise.
Stray bullets nicked the oaks
overhead. Leaves and splinters fell.

Someone near him groaned.
But it was his own voice he heard.
His fingers and feet tingled,
the roof of his mouth,
and the bridge of his nose. . . .

He became dry, dry, and thought
of Christ, who said, I thirst.
His man-smell, the smell of his hair
and skin, his sweat, the salt smell
that two women had known

left him, and a sharp, almost sweet
smell began to rise from his open mouth
in the warm shade of the oaks.
A streak of sun climbed the rough
trunk of a tree, but he did not
see it with his open eye.

Whence all their parents came;
From Germany and oft by chance
The humble Emerald Isle.

But my brown skin and close-curled hair
Was alien, and how it grew, none knew;
Few tried to say, some dropped a wonderful word or stray;
Some laughed and stared.

I placed together all I knew
I dreamed.

I shuddered in dumb terror
In silence screamed,
For now it seemed this I had dreamed;

How up from Hell, a land had leaped
Its very air a shriek of death
And agony of hurt.

I stayed asleep.
Forget I could not,
Of slavery and woe.

I lived and grew, I worked and hoped
Yet clamoured to awaken.
Along my hard and weary way
I walked with Death and yet I knew
And what in truth was Africa?

All closed and veiled as me he hailed
The endless Riddle of the Sphinx.

I went to Moscow; Ignorance grown wise taught me Wisdom;
I went to Peking: Poverty grown rich
Showed me the wealth of Work
I came to Accra.

I heard the Voice that loosed
The Long-looked dungeons of my soul
I sensed that Africa had come

I lifted up mine eyes to Ghana
And swept the hills with high Hosanna;
Till from that pinnacle of light
I saw dropped down this earth of crimson, green and gold
Roaring with color, drums and song.

Burnt by the kiss of everlasting suns
Trees danced, and foliage sang;

The lilies hallelujah rang
Pour high libations to the sun
And danced to gods.

Crowned heads.

Its Joy of Life
Its selfless role
Of giving.
Socialism blossoms bold
On Communism centuries old.

I cried to heaven as I died:
Toward the Rising Sun.

And Nile and Yang-tze roll:
Turn every yearning face of man.

Come with us, dark America:
And drowned a dream
Made fetid swamp a refuge seem:

Where once the Virgin Mary stood
And lynched the Christ.

Honor the sun;

Who rule the night
Where black is bright
And Greed is Sin.

Pan Africa!

In his malodorous brain what slugs and mire,
Lanthorned in his oblique eyes, guttering burned!
His body lodged a rat where men nursed souls.
The world flashed grape-green eyes of a foiled cat
To him. On fragments of an old shrunk power,
On shy and maimed, on women wrung awry,
He lay, a bullying hulk, to crush them more.
But when one, fearless, turned and clawed like bronze,
Cringing was easy to blunt these stern paws,
And he would weigh the heavier on those after.

Is but his cunning to make death more hard.
Your iron sinews take more pain in breaking.
And he has made the market for your beauty
Too poor to buy, although you die to sell.
Only that he has never heard of sleep;
And when the cats come out the rats are sly.
Here we are safe till he slinks in at dawn

But he has gnawed a fibre from strange roots,
And in the morning some pale wonder ceases.
Things are not strange and strange things are forgetful.
Ah! if the day were arid, somehow lost
Out of us, but it is as hair of us,
And only in the hush no wind stirs it.
And in the light vague trouble lifts and breathes,
And restlessness still shadows the lost ways.
The fingers shut on voices that pass through,
Where blind farewells are taken easily ....

Ah! this miasma of a rotting God!

Sometimes it takes miles to give up resistance,
though the mirror shows a body unresisting, shows
perhaps something to admire. Others may.
A body without difficulty loosening, breaking
its own willfulness, cracking itself
like a rusted bolt that finally begins to turn.
A body that turns. Toward openness, fantasy,
those desires of and not of the body. Sometimes
I notice a powerful man engaged steadily
repeating difficult action: folding himself, his tight
skin, over and over, lifting a declined torso
or pulling up a suspended trunk, and think,
how neat, how controlled to be inside that body.
I struggle not to stare, grip myself not to lose myself
inside the thought of being inside that body.
I can never get there I know because it is
the image I want, the veneer of muscle
having taken primacy from mind, now first
among equals: bicep, abdominal, quadricep,
the launch after launch of a perpetual run.
because even then, I am also that other thing,
self-conscious, burdened, struggling for movement.

the way He identifies with the so much
it must be in the body enacting will immediate
through movement, as if with a word
creating a world (enacting creation immediate
through speech). Which is to say, this is my time
of prayer, my only time: miles in, as long
as it takes for the body to relinquish resistance.
Bright, public, surrounded by others who move
toward better movement. And all the while seeing
in a wall of mirrors that image of myself, deer,
horse, running close kin to breathing, motion
necessary to survival, perfect image of a man
I pray for things, of course, for myself
and for those whose pain touches me, selfish
and unselfish prayers for intimates and strangers.
I pray for the runner in the mirror, too, sleek, easy
animal, unselfconscious and present, and absent
as a god, the man who could almost be me,
who I do my best to rush toward. I pray that
one day, by His grace, we may meet.

Gone, gone again,
May, June, July,
And August gone,
Again gone by,

Not memorable
Save that I saw them go,
As past the empty quays
The rivers flow.

And now again,
In the harvest rain,
The Blenheim oranges
Fall grubby from the trees,

And when the war began
To turn young men to dung.

Look at the old house,
Outmoded, dignified,
Dark and untenanted,
With grass growing instead

Of the footsteps of life,
The friendliness, the strife;
In its beds have lain
Youth, love, age, and pain:

I am something like that;
Only I am not dead,
Still breathing and interested

I am something like that:
Not one pane to reflect the sun,
They have broken every one.

lonely as four cherries on a tree
 at night, new moon, wet roads
 a moth or a snowflake
 whipping past glass
 lonely as the red noses of four clowns
 thrust up through snow
 their shine four whitened panes
 drawn from imagined memory
 lonely as no other lives
 touching to recorded water
 all objects stare
 their memories aware
 lonely as pain
 recoiling from itself
 imagining the cherries
 and roses reaching out

If it had become a competition in which we,
Like children desperate for the blue ribbon,
Pulled knotted hemp, gripping until certain
Of calluses, if our contest awarded the strongest,

Peak, a short thread of breaths, a tug of war

The line. That fat kid flounders through muck

If he tastes mud as bitter as this poem

What is it to grow old? 
Is it to lose the glory of the form, 
The luster of the eye? 
Is it for beauty to forego her wreath? 

Is it to feel each limb 
Grow stiffer, every function less exact, 
Each nerve more loosely strung? 

Yes, this, and more; but not 
Mellowed and softened as with sunset glow, 

As from a height, with rapt prophetic eyes, 
And heart profoundly stirred; 
And weep, and feel the fullness of the past, 
The years that are no more. 

It is to spend long days 
And not once feel that we were ever young; 
It is to add, immured 
In the hot prison of the present, month 
To month with weary pain. 

It is to suffer this, 
And feel but half, and feebly, what we feel. 
Deep in our hidden heart 
Festers the dull remembrance of a change, 

When we are frozen up within, and quite 
The phantom of ourselves, 
To hear the world applaud the hollow ghost 
Which blamed the living man. 

No, sweetheart, I said courtly love.
I was thinking of John Donne's
"Yet this enjoys before it woo,"
but my big hands were dreaming
Pinetop's boogie-woogie piano
taking the ubiquitous night apart.
Not Courtney. I know "inflated tear"
means worlds approaching pain
& colliding, or a heavenly body
calling to darkness, & that shame
has never been my truest garment,
because I was born afraid of needles.
But I've been shoved up against
frayed ropes too, & I had to learn
to bob & weave, to duck & hook,
till I could jab my way out of
a foregone conclusion, till blues
reddened a room. All I know is,
sometimes a man wants only a hug
when something two-steps him
toward a little makeshift stage.
Somehow, between hellhounds
& a guitar solo made of gutstring
& wood, I outlived a stormy night
with snow on my eyelids.

Where do you want my heart now?

Placed next to yours
on your pale skin
so that I will fall
in love with your sweaty pain

I have heard
your bones crack the dry cement
that leafed the frenzied spirit within

I witnessed its wildness escape into your body
screaming kissy words
while your fingers plucked at my guitar

trying to rip a path to my soul

& I froze there in my manly state

Tell me the way to the wedding
 Tell me the way to the war,
 And tell me what axe you are grinding
 Where the boy on the bivouac believes,
 What reel you are unwinding
 For the girl in her bed who grieves.
 He watches the sinking sun,
 And what he will do for fun.
 Will you read him the ways of war
 His Miranda rights in sin,
 Will you tell him what to ignore
 When he studies your discipline?
 In a dream that he is the one
 Death finds abed and wakes
 Just as the night is done.
 Tell me what boats go ashore
 Riding the oil-dimmed tide,
 Red streamers and black in store
 For the boy with a pain in his side.
 And tell me where they are heading
 Tonight; now tell me the score.
 Tell me the way to their wedding

The long road south, the pavement flat  
and black as a dash without end, no signs,  

no houses, the heat like an unseen fog  
and the sun a swollen crimson clot 

above fields where frazzle-haired palm trees rose  
sporadic and unwieldy, the miles  

of pasture where cattle of every conceivable  
color, rust and tobacco and ashen, fed  

and nursed their stumbling young,  
heavy heads bent to the ground.  

And insects that crashed against windshield  
so tiny, no body was left behind.  

and the shock of iron-red flecks against  

bowl, the water placid, unmoved.  
There was hardly any pain.  

What could we do but continue on  
as scattered street-lamps gradually revealed  

shuttered windows of bungalows pink  

as scrubbed flesh, the small dark yards of abandoned  
Bigwheels and plots of petunias or cukes,  

the closed, expectant mailboxes  
and the living already dead inside me.

When everything finally has been wrecked and further shipwrecked,
When their most ardent dream has been made hollow and unrecognizable,
They will feel inside their limbs the missing shade of blue that lingers
Against hills in the cooler hours before dark, and the moss at the foot of the forest
When green starts to leave it. What they take into their privacy (half of his embrace,
Her violence at play) are shadows of acts which have no farewells in them.
Moons unearth them. And when, in their separate dwellings, their bodies
Feel the next season come, they no longer have anyone to whom
To tell it. Clouds of reverie pass outside the window and a strange emptiness
Peers back in. If they love, it is solely to be adored, it is to scatter and gather
Themselves like hard seeds in a field made fallow by a fire someone years ago set.
In the quiet woods, from the highest trees, there is always something
Weightless falling; and he, who must realize that certain losses are irreparable,
Tells himself at night, before the darkest mirror, that vision keeps him whole.

On the verge of warm and simple sleep they tell themselves certain loves
Are like sheets of dark water, or ice forests, or husks of ships. To stop a thing
They may have caused. Quiet falls around them. And when she reaches
For him the air greens like underwater light and the well-waters drop.
They will see again the shadows of insects.
They will touch the bark and feel each age of the tree fly undisturbed
Into them. If what is no longer present in them cannot be restored,
It can at least be offered. Through long bewildered dusks, stalks grow;
Rains fill and pass out of clouds; animals hover at the edges of fields
With eyes like black pools. For nothing cannot be transformed;
Pleasure and failure feed each other daily. Do not think any breeze,
Any grain of light, shall be withheld. All the stars will sail out for them.

I am a reaper whose muscles set at sun-down. All my oats are cradled.
But I am too chilled, and too fatigued to bind them. And I hunger.

I crack a grain between my teeth. I do not taste it.
I have been in the fields all day. My throat is dry. I hunger.

My eyes are caked with dust of oat-fields at harvest-time.

My throat is dry. And should I call, a cracked grain like the oats

I fear to call. What should they hear me, and offer me their grain,

My ears are caked with dust of oat-fields at harvest-time. 
I am a deaf man who strains to hear the calls of other harvesters whose

It would be good to hear their songs . . . reapers of the sweet-stalked

I hunger. My throat is dry. Now that the sun has set and I am chilled.

I am a reaper. (Eoho!) All my oats are cradled. But I am too fatigued

O my brothers, I beat my palms, still soft, against the stubble of my

The first day was a long day
and the first night nearly eternal.
No thing existed, and only One was present
No meaning as we know it;
difference was bound in the All.
On the first day, water, 
on the second day, land, 
on the third day, two kinds of light,
one of them night.
On the fourth day, laughter, 
But when God laughed,
a crack ran through creation. 
On the fourth night, sorrow,
staring away from heaven,
torn in its ownness.
No evidence then of nothing,
but worlds upon worlds,
underwritten, overflowing:
the worlds of fear and of longing,
lacking in belief,
and the pitiful world of love, 
forever granting its own wishes.
Out of dust, like golems, 
God created man and woman,
and cast them into chance.
And man was subdued in those days.
All that could leap, leapt;
all that could weep, wept.
First of all places, Eden;
last of all places, Cleveland;
and a river flowed out of Eden,
inspiring in the dry land 
a panic of growth and harvest season.
The newly formed creation
took from flesh its beast
and from each word its sentence.
And early loves and hatreds blew
from thistle to thorn.
Each thing that God created,
he placed before man
so that he may name it:
and for each thing that man made,
God provided the name:
andiron, Nietzsche, corporation.
All speak of pain 
subtle in its clamor, 
as when the child, dying,
sinks into its skin
as under public snow.
Heartrending, each termination;
God-shaken, each beginning.
At the dawn of smoke,
pungent as creation, 
the long chaos rises over these trees.
For we opened our eyes in Eden,
with the taste of fruit on our lips.

(Genesis)

The people don't mention it much.
It goes without saying,

that concentration camp
on their reservation.

And they avoid that massive site

that massive void
punctuated by crusted nails,
punctured pipes, crumbled
failings of foundations . . .

What else is there to say?

This was a lush land once,
graced by a gifted people
gifted with the wisdom
of rivers, seasons, irrigation.

The waters went flowing
in the delicate workings

What else is there to say?

Then came the nation.
Then came the death.

Then came the desert.
Then came the camp.

But the desert is not deserted.
It goes without saying,

wind, spirits, tumbleweeds, pain.

It's neither red 
nor sweet. 
It doesn't melt 
or turn over, 
break or harden, 
so it can't feel 
pain, 
yearning, 
regret. 

It doesn't have 
a tip to spin on, 
it isn't even 
just a thick clutch 
of muscle, 
lopsided, 
mute. Still, 
I feel it inside 
its cage sounding 
a dull tattoo: 
but I can't open it: 
there's no key. 
I can't wear it 
on my sleeve, 
or tell you from 
the bottom of it 
how I feel. Here, 
but you'll have 
to take me, 
too.

so when I felt it, 
sitting at my beat-up farm desk

that looks out glass doors 

bathing in the cube-shaped fountain

so violently they drain it, 

the white-throats with their 
wobbly two-note song 

on the long way south still, 

and our dogs 
out like lights and almost 

falling off their chairs

freed of the real-time for awhile
as time began for me

to swell, slow down, carry me out 

of all this almost 
to a where

about as strong a lure as love.

of the woman in the bathroom.

She is drying her hair, the woman
for diagonal cuts
or discoloration
or bite marks from small insects
that may be in our bed.

though disproportionately
strong insects in our bed.

taking off. The first time
with drool on their shirts.

She is drying her hair
Drying her hair
Drying her hair
while having red thoughts
about what the pain in her nipple means.

I would not dry my hair
in such a moment but I am bald.
has many ways to cease
being the body of the woman.

to be happy
and she is that way.

We would be romantic in public places.

For the moment
by petting a dog.

That sometimes a part of the body
just hurts.
That the purpose of prayer
the little toe or appendix.

I have no reason
to use the word cancer
while petting a dog.

nor is it on the ground.

that no one can die
inside that piece of a second.

If you are comforted
to keep it.

"When I hit her on the head, it was good,

it was as if somebody else did it...

Everything flat, without sharpness, richness or line.

Still, I liked to drive past the woods where she lay,
hop out and do it to her...

The whole buggy of them waiting for me
but still, just like I knew all along,

When the body got too discomposed,
I'd just jack off, letting it fall on her...

and then,
under me, a little girl was just lying there in the mud:

standing above her there,

staying with a woman; but she was gone;
you could smell the wine in the air; and he started,
real embarrassing, to cry...
and he asked me to forgive him for
Who would have wanted to stay with Mom? with bastards
not even his own kids?

who I picked up, hit on the head, and
screwed, and screwed, and screwed, and screwed, then

buried,

to feel things make sense: I remember

and being almost suffocated by the asphalt;
and grass; and trees; and glass;
just there, just there, doing nothing!
but also being a wall; dead, and stopping me;

beneath it, and make it
somehow, come alive...

I had passed a million times on the road, everything

fit together; was alright;
it seemed like
trying, and at last finally finished drawing this

somebody else did it, some bastard

itself all the time, a lousy
pile of bricks, plaster, that didn't seem to

I was screwing a goat; and the rope around his neck
when he tried to get away
he died...
but it didn't do any good...

Mom once said:

I tried so hard to come; more pain than anything else;
but didn't do any good...

so I drove over to Connecticut to see him and see
if he was happy.
she had lots of little kids, and I don't know why,
I felt shaky...
snuck up to the window to look in...
six months old on his lap, laughing
and bouncing the kid, happy in his old age
it twisted me up...

and believe me, was determined, determined,
to head straight for home...

I kept thinking about getting a girl,
and the more I thought I shouldn't do it,

saw she was alone, and
kept circling the blocks as she walked along them,
saying, 'You're going to leave her alone.'
'You're going to leave her alone.'

As the seasons changed, and you saw more and more
of the skull show through, the nights became clearer,

nothing worked...
would blur like I wanted it to;
and I couldn't, couldn't,
get it to seem to me
that somebody else did it...

I tried, and tried, but there was just me there,
and her, and the sharp trees
saying, 'That's you standing there.

what I see..."

He begged them to let him
Other ultimately physical agony say
 Of him today because I want to die
I'd like you to listen as I live
Remind me how he insisted.

listen, a bad thing happened to
only can tell my own story which

so good. so so.

But it felt undoable. This lucky life
every day, every day. every, day.

(all the poetry books the goddamn same
until one guy gets up and stuns the audience.)

Joe Wenderoth, not by a long shot
anyone to no one in particular and reads a poem

Meanwhile, the psychiatrist, attractive
in a fatherly way, says, Libido question mark.

And your libido?

fix it.

a good novel, by which I mean finished,
not what the Dr. meant
by libido?

Books with prominent serifs: their feet feet feet I am

other

than the neuronic slave I thought anxiety made me
do it, made me get up and carry forth, sally
the children to school the poems dragged
by little hands on their little serifs
to the page, my marriage sustained, remaining
energy: project #1, project #2, broken
fixtures, summer plans, demands met, requests
granted, bunny noodles with and without cheesy
at the same time, and the nighttime, I insomnia

mental

make it better.

Everything was the same, then,
but better.

At night I slept.
In the morning got up.

Kids to school, husband still a fool-
hardy spirit makes
elbow from writing prose those shift+hold+letter,
less crazy-jealous just
the government makes me put stickers
who are Jews, and mine all are. Can they get us
all? I escape with a beautiful light-haired man,
blue-eyed day trader, gentile.

malleable, not so fatal now

the dose is engineered like that new genetic watercress
to turn from green to red when planted over buried
mines, nitrogen dioxide makes for early autumn,
red marks the spot where I must

Brown a first-cut brisket in hot Dutch oven
thickly sliced onions and add wine (sweet
is better, lasts forever, never need a new bottle).
Put the meat on onions, cover with tomato-sauce-
onion-soup-mix mixture, cover. Back in low oven
many hours.

trying to get out of Egypt.

The house smells like meat.
My hair smells like meat.

saves his brothers those jealous boys who sold him
sold them all as slaves. Seven years of plenty. Seven
years of famine. He insomnias the nights counting up
grains, storing, planning, for what? They say throw
the small boys in the river (and mothers do so). Smite
the sons (and fathers do it). God says take off your shoes,
this holy ground this pitiful, incombustible bush.

Is God chemical?
Enzymatic of our great need to chaos?

cheeks. Slap, turn, slap.

To be chosen is to be
unforgiving/unforgiv-
en, always chosen:
be better.

The Zuckers are a long line of obsessives.

This served them well in wartime saw it
coming in time that unseeable thing they
hoarded, they ferried, schemed, paced, got the hell

The husband, a country club Jew from Denver,
American intelligentsia, will have to carry me out
not a small girl how fast . . .

can the doctor switch the refugee gene back on?

How fast can I get worse? Smart again and worse?

It is better to be alive than better.

All children unlearn this fear you got confused

of a syndrome fear of medication of being better . . .

Truth is, the anti-obsessional medicine works

Light unto the Nation.

About this time of year but years ago
the priests spread rumors of blood libel.
Jews huddled in basements accused
to make unleavened bread.

Signs and wonders.
Christ rises.

Blood and body and babes.
Basements and briskets
and bread of afflictions.

[I] am calm now with my pounds of meat
made and frozen, my party schedule, my pills
of liberation, my gentile dream-boy, American
passport, my gray-haired psychiatrist, my blue-
eyed son, my brown-eyed son, my poems on their
pretty little fleet-feet, my big shot friends, olive-skinned
husband, my right elbow on fire: fire inside deep in the nerve
from too much carrying and word-mongering, smithery, bearing
and tensing, choosing to be better to live this real life this better orbit this Jack

Blake.
Buddha.
he loves

for the camera, blood pressure
for signs and wonders what a little chemistry
does for the brain, blood, thoughts, hey,

did you know that Pharaoh actually wanted
to let them go? those multitude Jews
to prove his prowess, show his signs, wonders, outstretched
hand, until the dosage was a perfect ten and then
some, sea closing up around those little chariots
the men and horses while women on the far shore shook
their tambourines. And then what?

to get the small slavery off them.

Because of this. Bloody Nile. My story
one of the lucky. Escaped hatch even from

Because of what my ancestors did for me to tell this
story of the outstretched hand what it did for me this
marked door and behind this red-marked door, around
a corner a blue-eyed boy waits to love me up with his
leavened bread, his slim body, professional detachment,
rhapsody of affliction and escape, the mind bobbing along
in its watery safe. Be like everyone. Else. Indistinguishable but
better, all better. All Christian. Kind.

Of course wars, of course lice, of course limbs on opposing sides
to remind a body about ambivalence, of course orphans and empty beds and eyes
exiled for blinking in the harsh light. Of course Khrushchev gave Crimea
to the Ukraine in a blind drunk, and yes, land mines and burning skin
and of course organs, some members dismembered
to shake at strangers and their evil, and there is no way
Of course personal, add starch for pain, add bluing, of course hang
the laundry in the basement, there are thieves in the backyard, of course
departing trains, carload after carload of sorrow,
the man on top of a boxcar waving,
his rifle silhouetted against the white sky, its color draining
knowing he had reached the end of something though it was not end enough.
Of course kisses, the stages of kissing like running borders,
endless conversations, stations of the cross, till even the promise of kissing bores you,
of course teeth gnashing, ethnic cleansing. The cynical will shrug off the past,
the future, the whole left hip of Ecuador slashed for six days of oil,
of course an X on the coats of the sick so they would stand apart
for deportation, of course rogue tumors over the body politic,
the same bodies that took Egyptian mummies and powdered them
to use as food seasoning, bon vivant cannibalism,
and yes civilized men tossed living penguins into furnaces to fuel their ships.
Of course partitions so that after the new territories were defined,
families had to line up on a cliff with bullhorns
to talk to their people on the other side,
of course courage, at times a weapon against yearning, surrender another,
and a friend will say gently of course I want to ride with you to the funeral,
of course of course of course of course,
now then, negotiations, whatever,
palisades, the end of whimsy,
but then one evening though it is wartime,
a man climbs the hill to an amphitheater to play his cello at twilight
and history stops talking for a moment and sighs
while the melancholy of Albinoni
passes from heart to heart and each lifts a little,
the way passing a baby around a room can be sacramental,
and the memories of simple pleasures become more beautiful, the memory
of your joy on a highway to see in the next lane in a neighboring car
a clown take off his nose at the end of the day, the memory
of how your mother laid roses, sweetheart roses, on the cold grate of the fireplace,
and you huddled deep in your overcoat in the wet,
waiting out the storm with a sheep
that had come up to lean against your side
like a rock.

Today I became King
of the Court w/out a diamond-
encrusted crown thrust upon 
my sweaty head. Instead
my markings of royalty
were the t-shirt draping 
my body like a robe soaked 
in champagne & the pain
of a battle endured, my will 
tested & bested by none 
as the ball flew off my hands
as swift as an arrow toward
ringless yet feeling like gold.

If only God would save me, 
 I would know how to hurt you.
 If only God would save me, 
 I would know who to sell my soul to.
 Anything is an autobiography, 
 William Burroughs insisted
 literature lagged 50 years behind painting, 
 thinking no doubt about abstraction, collage, 
 fragmentation, his cut-ups.
 But whatever that meant (why always 50 years?), or however 
 he presumed to rile other writers, 
 so that if I put a pine tree
 into a poem,
 a grove of pine trees
 and beyond them the sea,
 instead of two obligatory centuries of nature studies, all those
 Technicolor vistas, torch songs, couples 
 drifting through leaves in Salem commercials. 
 Into one life and out another, 
 the way a junkie playing a writer, 
 a writer playing a priest,
 so that when I finally blurted out, 
 you assumed the burden of personal urgency, 
 supposed it was me speaking at the limits of my self-control
Temptation, and Leave Her to Heaven.
 You open your mouth and a tradition dribbles out.
 how almost impossible to avoid mimesis, 
 the way to think about God might be
 to disobey God, 
 so that if everything is an autobiography, 
 this is a conversion.
 As my lives flash before me, 
 why must the yearning for God
 trump all other yearnings?
 You often hear converts confess
 why not the other way around?
 The admission of Jesus into your life
 concealing instead the wish, say, a need
Oh God! Oh God! on a hotel bed . . .
 God embraces our yearnings.
 That afternoon my father heard his diagnosis of inoperable cancer,
 my aunt Barbara demanded we get him to Lourdes
 In the movie of my life, 
 my father died
 after I forgave him,
 & when my secret tormentor said may the ghosts of your dreams 
 gnaw at your belly like a wolf under your jacket,
 did she really want revenge, 
 or was she just killing time?
 for me God is a pain in the ass;
 this hour I tell you things in confidence,
 The world is a road under the wall to the church, 
 the world is a church, & the world is a road, 
 & the world is a stone wall.
 Still, he wanted her the way the Cardinal wanted the Caravaggio,
 one night Papal Guards searched his house.
 Of course contraband came to light, some illegal rifles, 
 the Cardinal got his Caravaggio.
 you were not a Caravaggio. 
 So I asked you to be in my movie.

Your parents had reached a long slow time,
as animals do, the great center of their lives,
when they gleam in their fells as though eternally,
unchanging. Or as a day can seem eternal
if you lie and watch the full clouds, conscious
of your own time: you soon must get up and leave.
So father, mother, the small shabby town,
its patch of earth going on as though forever: you
forgets what he has to lean on
so deeply and heavily that it wounds his side
and the pain seems only himself.

Ungrateful? So you accused yourself one day,
waking suddenly. And when you went at last
or were withered alive, their mouths opening and closing
without sound. The buildings had leaned still farther
toward the dusty weeds and crumbs of old machines
littered everywhere inexplicably. And now
is as absent from your thought as is your own
gestation. And check the records:
what is written down says nothing.
The volumes all avoid the one question you have.
you turn the endless pages and you wonder,
what did I know or feel, how did I live then,
what was this violence and love, this utter newness,
invention that could sing water and light, raging
at the first touch of dying, never mentioning death?
You went back and the bones of your native town
were like that, records from which something had escaped:
a skeletal mill that roofed ghostly technologies
where men once worked, coughed, burnt, bled.
And that way they had permitted the long pageants
vague, identical, stalk by in the nights,
each one sorrowing and serene, her starved, enamelled,
hard flesh torn, her dress the blue of late dusk,
the heaven behind her a work of flat blinding gold.

Once there was a woman who laughed for years uncontrollably after a stroke. 

Once there was a child who woke after surgery to find his parents were impostors. 

These seagulls above the parking lot today, made of hurricane and ether, they 

have flown directly out of the brain wearing little blue-gray masks, like strangers' faces, full 

of fruit trees in April, and your car, which I parked in a shadow before you died, decorated now with feathers,  

and unrecognizable  
with the windows unrolled  
and the headlights on  
and the engine still running  
in the Parking Space of the Sun.

Time to recount the sparrows of the air. 
Seated alone on an elected stair, 
I stare as they appear and disappear.

Tonight the deck supports tremendous quiet,
although the twilight is itself a riot.

My pen, eye, notes, watch, whiskey glass and hell 
all hang together comfortably well. 
Pain is my favorite resort hotel.

I find no peace, and all my war is done. 
I fear and hope. I burn and freeze like ice. 
I fly above the wind, yet can I not arise; 
And nought I have, and all the world I season. 
That loseth nor locketh holdeth me in prison 
Nor letteth me live nor die at my device, 
And yet of death it giveth me occasion. 
Without eyen I see, and without tongue I plain. 
I desire to perish, and yet I ask health. 
I love another, and thus I hate myself. 
I feed me in sorrow and laugh in all my pain; 
Likewise displeaseth me both life and death, 
And my delight is causer of this strife. 

Highlight Actions
Enable or disable annotations

"I grant you ample leavegrant you ample leave In other words, to let you express your grand opinion 
To use the hoaryhoary Ancient, worthy of respect for its age formula 'I am' 
Naming the emptiness where thought is not; 
But fill the void with definition, 'I' 
Will be no more a datumdatum A single piece of data or information than the words 
You link false inferencefalse inference In philosophy and logic, an inference is the act or process of deriving logical conclusions from premises known or assumed to be true. Inferences are typically evaluated to be valid or invalid. with, the 'Since' & 'so' 
That, true or not, make up the atom-whirlatom-whirl The orbital paths of electrons around the nucleus. 
With vibrant ether clotted into worlds: 
Your subject, self, or self-assertive 'I' 
Turns nought but object, melts to molecules, 
Is stripped from naked Being with the rest 
Of those rag-garments named the Universe. 
Or if, in strife to keep your 'Ego' strong 
You make it weaver of the etherial lightetherial light Heavenly light, 
Why, still 'tis Being looking from the dark, 
The core, the centre of your consciousness, 
That notes your bubble-worldbubble-world : sense, pleasure, pain, 
What are they but a shifting otherness, 

Though half my years besiege the aged sun,
Droops sweatily in courses just begun.

Oh, I have loved and lusted with the best,

My mind rebounds to nether joys and pain,
And every rockless path to hell again.

I wait the hour when gods have more to give
Than husks and bare insatiate will to live.

Elm-hidden, and the tributaries
I neither expected anything
A language not to be betrayed;
Who answer when such whispers bid.

I used to think 
The mind essential in the body, even 
As stood the body essential in the mind: 
Two inseparable things, by nature equal 
Halving the total scale: it is not so. 
Unlike and cross like driftwood sticks they come 
Churned in the giddy trough: a chunk of pine, 
A slab of rosewood: mangled each on each 
With knocks and friction, or in deadly pain 
Was vomited in horror from the sea.

I walked in the house
on the flat aspect of the wood
I took rectangular instruction of the wood
when I walked I turned at the wall
and on the flat I moved steadily
unimpeded, not tumbling, climbing or short of breath.
I walked in ease on the flat.
and zinged out of it, pre-instructed
and paid for the house. I felt
house on my heel then instep and toe.
I had a bad foot and I paid
to get it fixed so I could walk here.
I paid for the house and I paid for the
foot that touches it. I paid to be
directed rectangularly and down a hall.
I curved my body to direct
my waste through a hole. I am helped
and paying for it.
all of me exchanged,
housing exchange.
And we sank into
the edges of the sea-veil
when the wind crevassed and doilied
I broke my arm and the window
integrally to exchange.
I paid someone to fix me and improve
the window, triple-glazing it, and warmer
Suppose I did not go in pain
for x-rays, left the window smashed
I was painful and determined
not to play, and with the other unemployed
sagged with holes.

The coin changed hands
to transact.

The American public is patient,
  The American public is slow,
The American public will stand as much
  As any public I know.
We submit to be killed by our railroads,
  We submit to be fooled by our press,
We can stand as much government scandal
  As any folks going, I guess,
We can bear bad air in the subway,
  We can bear quick death in the street,
But we are a little particular
  About the things we eat.

It is not so much that it kills us --
  We are used to being killed;
But we like to know what fills us
  When we pay for being filled
When we pay the Beef Trust prices,
  As we must, or go without,
It is not that we grudge the money
  But we grudge the horrid doubt.
Is it ham or trichinosis?
  Can a label command belief?
Is it pork we have purchased, or poison?
  Is it tuberculosis or beef?

There is really a choice of diseases,
  To any one, little or big;
And no man really pleases
  To die of a long dead pig.
  On elevator and train,
But to sit in peace at the table
  And to be seized with sudden pain
When we are at home and happy --
Is really against the grain.

And besides admitting the poison,
  Admitting we all must die,
Accepting the second-hand sickness
  From a cholera-smitten stye;
Patiently bearing the murder,
We do rise up and remonstrate
  Against the Packingtown dirt.
Let there be death in the dinner,
  Subtle and unforeseen,
But O, Mr. Packer, in packing our death,

Remember, while the Sun his blessing sheds 
How often we have watcht him laying down 
What will succeed it now? Mine is unblest, 
But on the very thought that swells with pain. 
O give me back what Earth, what (without you) 
One of the golden days that we have past, 
Or else the gift would be, however sweet, 

Image tensed, 
I eye the instant,
And I expect no one;
In the lit shadows
I watch as the doorbell
Sheds its inaudible
And I expect no one;
Within four walls
Astounded more by space 
Than any desert place,
I expect no one;
But come he will,
He must, if I hold on
To bloom unseen;
When I am least aware:
Coming as if to forgive
All he gives to death,
Coming to assure me 
Of his reward and mine,
Coming as anodyne
Perhaps his whisper is
Already on its way.

1

Lord, what are the sins
I have tried to leave behind me? The bad checks,
and into the woods, the cruelty of silence,
the cruelty of lies, the jealousy,
the indifference?

or failure
the moon-streaked fields between Benevolence
and Cuthbert where dwarfed cotton sparkles like pearls
on the shoulders of the road. What are these
sick and sleepless
behind the wheel of this U-Haul truck parked in a field
a few miles north of Damascus,
some makeshift rest stop for eighteen wheelers
where the long white arms of oaks slap across trailers
and headlights glare all night through a wall of pines?

2

What was I thinking, Lord?
on direction?

So the jon boat muscled up the ramp,
the mattress and box springs,
a broken turntable, a Pioneer amp, a pair
of three-way speakers, everything mine
I intended to keep. Everything else abandon.

But on the road from one state
a last word rising to a scream, a salad bowl
shattering against a kitchen cabinet, china barbs
like the bedsheet that morning long ago
just before I watched the future miscarried.

Jesus, could the irony be
that suffering forms a stronger bond than love?

3

Now the sun
of light drawing highways in the dew-cover.
I roll down the window and breathe the pine-air,
the after-scent of rain, and the far-off smell
of asphalt and diesel fumes.

But mostly pine and rain
as though the world really could be clean again.

Somewhere behind me,
west Georgia, light is falling
through the windows of my half-empty house.
so long after everything has fallen
toward grace? Could I be moved
to believe in new beginnings? Could I be moved?

i knew you before you had a mother,
when you were newtlike, swimming,
a horrible brain in water.
i knew you when your connections
belonged only to yourself,
when you had no history
to hook on to,
barnacle,
when you had no sustenance of metal
when you had no boat to travel
when you stayed in the same
place, treading the question;
i knew you when you were all
blank as they sky of a mind,
a root, neither ground nor placental;
not yet
red with the cut nor astonished
by pain, one terrible eye
open in the center of your head
to night, turning, and the stars
in the last trickle of champagne
shared the night of the closet,
the parasitic
closing on our thumbprint,
we were smudged in a yellow book.

son, we were oak without
mouth, uncut, we were
brave before memory.

Again at Christmas did we weave 
And calmly fell our Christmas-eve: 

The yule-log sparkled keen with frost, 
The quiet sense of something lost. 

As in the winters left behind, 
And dance and song and hoodman-blind. 

Who show'd a token of distress? 
O grief, can grief be changed to less? 

O last regret, regret can die! 
But with long use her tears are dry. 

Won in many wars . . .

These are the women of Flanders.

Oh, poor dears!
Wintertime nighs;
But my bereavement-pain
It cannot bring again:
        Twice no one dies.

        Flower-petals flee;
But, since it once hath been,
No more that severing scene
        Can harrow me.

        Birds faint in dread:
I shall not lose old strength
In the lone frost's black length:
        Strength long since fled!

        Leaves freeze to dun;
But friends can not turn cold
This season as of old
        For him with none.

        Tempests may scath;
But love can not make smart
Again this year his heart
        Who no heart hath.

        Black is night's cope;
But death will not appal
One who, past doubtings all,
        Waits in unhope.

The roasting alive of rabbis
open without prerequisite
when I was an undergraduate.

expectation that their souls
would waft up to the bosom
of the Almighty the rabbis burned,
pious past the humming extremes
while chanting Hear, O Israel.

Why?
kiss the Cross, pretend?
sort out real from sham?
Did He want
the eyeballs popping,
the corpses shrinking in the fire?

We live in an orderly
in Harvard Magazine. 
Bliss is belief,
agnostics always say
a little condescendingly
on a higher moral plane.

Muslim kamikazes
hurling their explosives-
certitude of a better life beyond.

taxi. The driver is Yemeni,
loves rock music and hangs
on tassels from his rearview mirror.

I do not tell him that in Yemen
to ride their donkeys astride,
having just seen this humiliation
illustrated on the Museum screen.

When his parents came
they would live or die.
the Messiah had drawn nigh.

I do not ask, who tied
Who loosed pigs in the Temple,
set tribe against tribe
and nailed man in His pocket?

those patriarchal fists
in the face. But would
I die to save a child?
Rescue my lover? Would
I run into the fiery barn
to release animals,
singed and panicked, from their stalls?

No answers. Only questions.

It was in August, such a lovely summer, that I began the massacring.
The flower killing. Feeding the sunflowers to the industrial dough mixer.
Soon there was enough yellow petal pulp for twelve loaves.
For twelve times ten loaves.
For twelve hundred loaves.
One of the food critics in town came around to inquire about my baking system.
. . . I glanced at the machete, propped next to the ovens.
Toward October (and what auburn weather!), I still felt
it, the substance of the soul, the libidinal terrible whatever.
I sat out back with the two countergirls, Haley and Shayla. There was one cigarette,
and we were sharing.
Mourning is the horizon of all desire, we were commiserating.
They sell Kaiser rolls and sliced Sicilian and then they leave and put on a fancy tanktop
and go out for the evening.
The little white clematis cling to the fences.
(At dawn the buds were dying as a sweet white bread was rising.)
November
How beautiful were the yellow mums in the thin wintry sun!
The bread they made had the hue of golden potatoes.
December
Specks of red in lit windows: amaryllis
that I stole and slaughtered and sold inside a pain de mie roll.
I love how in the cold, my breath flowers before me.
January, February
I hacked through the ice to get at flower fetuses. The breads were very seedy.
Spring
It was really beginning.
Baguettes made entirely of white peonies.
Brioche from the blood of purple lilacs.
What is the secret ingredient?
I confessed: Flower. Flowers! Please, put me away. I am desperate.
Summer
I could not go through another.
The woodbine had barely begun and already the mornings were full of the scent of
them.
I closed the doors (every season is too full of longing!) and rechristened myself Flora.
I drank a vat of rose water and put both my wrists through the slicer.
Flour.
And then you came in.
The bakery is closed, I said tersely.
I was bleeding profusely.
I loved you even before you said
Nothing breaks more slowly, more silently, than bread.
With my blood pouring out as a fine, dry flour
let me confess before I expire.
There on the counter, in that vase
fresh and pink is the corsage I was keeping for our dance.

Listless he eyes the palisades
 Nothing to do; and vacant hands
 Around him swarm the plaining ghosts
 A wilderness of faces dim,
 A smiting sun. No shed, no tree;
 A den that sick hands dug in earth
 Or, dropping in his place, he swoons,

We went to all those places where they restore sadness and joy
and call it art. We were piloted by Auden who became
Unbearably acrimonious when we dropped off Senghor into the
steamy skies of his beloved West Africa. The termites and ants
were waiting for him to unearth the sun in Elissa. The clouds
light coffee flame in his eyes guiding us like an old Irish house
cleaner holding a candle in a black and white English movie.
his youth and vigorous sunlight. He knew eternity would vanish
the sun at dusk. He caught it with a rainbow tied to his finger.
There was nothing left after that. We cross the equator
stems of her longer poems preserved in darkness and memory
like wild pearls thrown overboard to avoid capture by Spanish
aquarium. We are candy wrappers being blown across the
waxed floors of poetry. We land on the Brooklyn Bridge.
in the thorny arms of Gerard Manley Hopkins whose head was
the world. Gertrude Stein is a match flaring on a young
the green Atlantic into World War One. We are met by Rilke
dressed in his Orpheus uniform wearing white sonnet gloves
that once belonged to a stone angel. Rilke offers us a glass of
fragrant, there is a lingering afterthought of Pound on the
tongue. Pound collected his misty feelings to make raindrops
into European and American poetry. Vagueness became as
sharp as a pencil. Our blue box is not allowed to attend
Roman past to spend afternoons with Williams filling wheel-
barrows with the twentieth century. Both Apollinaire and
Williams could hail a cab on Madison Avenue in any country.
After the bash we toured Paris and London with D.H. Lawrence
who kept stopping to relieve himself of the great mysteries of
life whenever we went by a Bavarian gentian plant. He claimed
he was writing poetry for his new book: Acts of Attention for
Love Poems. Eliot was rebuilding London when we left. It
reminded him of Detroit or Cincinnati or Saint Louis. He was
removing despair from the weather. He thought it affected
emptiness with old English churches that pray for water heaters
and cloudless nights. Mayakovsky, on the other hand, insisted
there were bugs in Russia who could write poetry just as
interestingly as Eliot. The Russian winter is elegant cruelty
most boring statement he had ever heard. Although
not act like a drunken amputee at the dinner table and always
said pleasant things that came out of nowhere. His
conversation was experimental but logical and he investigated
words, mixing them on paper with a pencil. Cummings was all
etcetera after a few drinks. We move the sun to South
America. Neruda had become an organic poet writing about
usual, Allen was rolling incense and howling at America. Allen
was always mystical and beautiful when he walked on the
Lower East Side. When he stepped into the old Jewish
of subatomic poetry, asked Allen what was the future of poetry
in the borough of Queens? Allen placed the palm of his right
worry about its future anymore, because it has so little left of
Finally, suicide could talk about the pain of living with
Avenue with a diamond in his head. We were the personal
becoming black, abandoning us for a noble cause, according to
Frank, who loved Imamu Amiri Baraka. We were the details in
John Ashbery arrived from Paris on a plane made of expensive
suits, shirts, and ties. Like his poems, he was sparkling and
squeaky clean, dressed in elegant language. He is the
daydream that had become a poet. His subject is to have no
subject. Perhaps a casual reference to someone special. He is
a poet of the less obvious in life: the sestina made of clouds.
Snyder. There is no other life for his outdoor poems,
hitchhiking on hands-on love. Gary seems to have time to
write poems about the notes in his life. Kenneth, on the other
hand, has a paper cup full of wonderful poems. He can write a
poem about a cathedral living in a paper cup. Kenneth travels
everywhere with his paper cup. At a certain time of day,
Kenneth finds room in his paper cup for perfect days and
perfect moments:
Perfect moments when Frank spoke to us.
Perfect moments when Allen spoke to us.
And they sang to us
with human wings
upon which we sleep.

Where is the promise of my years; 
Ere errors, agonies and fears 
Brought with them all that speaks in tears, 
Ere I had sunk beneath my peers; 

Naught lingers to redeem those hours,  
The flowers that bloomed in sunny bowers 
Are withered all; and Evil towers 
Supreme above her sister powers 

I look along the columned years,  
Just where it fell, amid the jeers 
Of scornful lips, whose mocking sneers, 
For ever hiss within mine ears 

I can but own my life is vain 
I missed the goal I sought to gain, 
I missed the measure of the strain 

Myself! alas for theme so poor 
A spectre not within the door, 
A houseless shadow evermore, 

Thin are the night-skirts left behind
            By daybreak hours that onward creep,
            And thin, alas! the shred of sleep
That wavers with the spirit's wind:
But in half-dreams that shift and roll
            And still remember and forget,
My soul this hour has drawn your soul
                      A little nearer yet.

Our lives, most dear, are never near,
            Our thoughts are never far apart,
            Though all that draws us heart to heart
Seems fainter now and now more clear.
To-night Love claims his full control,
            And with desire and with regret
My soul this hour has drawn your soul
                      A little nearer yet.

Is there a home where heavy earth
            Melts to bright air that breathes no pain,
            Where water leaves no thirst again
And springing fire is Love's new birth?
If faith long bound to one true goal
            May there at length its hope beget,
My soul that hour shall draw your soul
                      For ever nearer yet.

Sad of heart am I to-night; 
Dolefully I drink my beer, 
But no single line I write. 
Yet I glower at pen and ink: 
Oh, inspire me, Muse, I pray, 
It is later than you think! 
 

Bravo! let me write it down; 
Hold it with a hopeful gaze, 
Gauge it with a fretful frown; 
How the words are dark and dire: 
It is later than you think. 

Weigh them well .... Behold yon band, 
Students drinking by the door, 
Madly merry, bock in hand, 
Saucers stacked to mark their score. 
Get you gone, you jolly scamps; 
Let your parting glasses clink; 
Seek your long neglected lamps: 
It is later than you think. 

Look again: yon dainty blonde, 
All allure and golden grace, 
Oh so willing to respond 
Should you turn a smiling face. 
Play your part, poor pretty doll; 
Feast and frolic, pose and prink; 

Puffed and purple, tense and tired; 
Pasha-like he holds his place, 
Hated, envied and admired. 
How you gobble life, my friend; 
Wine, and woman soft and pink! 
Well, each tether has its end: 

See yon living scarecrow pass 
With a wild and wolfish stare 
At each empty absinthe glass, 
As if he saw Heaven there. 
Poor damned wretch, to end your pain 
There is still the Greater Drink. 
Yonder waits the sanguine Seine ... 
It is later than you think. 

Lastly, you who read; aye, you 
Who this very line may scan: 
Have you done the best you can? 
See! the tavern lights are low; 
God! and is it time to go? 
Ah! the clock is always slow; 
It is later than you think; 
Sadly later than you think; 
Far, far later than you think.

It would be neat if with the New Year
I could leave my loneliness behind with the old year.
My leathery loneliness an old pair of work boots
my dog vigorously head-shakes back and forth in its jaws,
rain, sun, snow, or wind
in bare feet, pondering my poem,

But my happiness depends so much on wearing those boots.

At the end of my day
I stare at my boots appreciating:
I smile at my boots, understanding every note in his voice,
and strangers, when they see my boots rocking back and forth on my
keeping beat to the song, see how
my boots are scuffed, tooth-marked, worn-soled.

I keep wearing them because they fit so good
and I need them, especially when I love so hard,
where I go up those boulder strewn trails,
where flowers crack rocks in their defiant love for the light.

The farmhouses north of Driggs,
silos for miles along the road saying
BUTLER or SIOUX. The light saying
rain coming on, the wind not up yet,
animals waiting as the front hits
everything on the high fiats, hailstones
bouncing like rabbits under the sage.
Nothing running off. Creeks clear.
The river itself a shallow, straight
shoot to the north, its rocks mossy,
slick above the few deep pockets.
On another drainage, the O-T-O.
Loose stands of aspen on the slopes.
Dude cabins, their porches and split-log
loveseats, dull yellow curtains
slapping over the open sills.
From Emigrant north to the Great Bend,
loaves of haystacks, stud farms, charolais,
steel flumes between the ditches.
closed to its whole length, the county roads
dusty, turning onto the high
shelves of side valleys. Scattered
shacks and corrals. An old homestead,
the sod roof rotting out its timbers.
Below the spurs from the higher range,
basins in the mountain pastures
fill with odd water. The henbane dries.
Ruts cross in the grass at a schoolhouse.
Each runnel mixing where it can
the spring creeks deepen and go on
easily, swelling to the larger
tributary with its pools and banks.
At any bend the willows bend too,
and gravel bars on the other shore
flare into the shallows. An encampment.
Ponies wade to their knees and drink,
raising up now and then to look
out through the smoke to the near hills,
the one plateau heading off beyond
the Crazies and the Little Belts, north.
It strikes the river at the Gates,
the water piling through its broad course,
level, ridges and the vertical
faces of bluffs crowding to each side.
This rock is of an excellent grit for
whetstones, hard and sharp. There is here
more timber than below the falls. A spring
immensely clear and of a bluish cast
boils up near its center with such force
that its surface in that part is strangely
higher than the surrounding earth.
I heard today a noise resembling
the discharge of a piece of ordnance.
Unless it be the bursting of the
rich mines of silver in these mountains,
I am at a loss to account for it.
As the passages about the falls are
narrow and steep, and as the buffalo
travel to the river in great herds,
the hinder part presses those in front
out of their depth to the strong current.
Their carcasses by the hundreds
litter the shore below the cataracts.
We have made of the mast of the pirogue
two axletrees. Walked ahead to my first
view of the falls, hearing them from afar.
Their spray is scarcely formed when
bodies of the same beaten water thrust
over and down, concealing every shape,
their whiteness alone visible.
We will leave at this place all heavy
baggage, the red pirogue, and whatever
provisions we can do without. Needing
a cellar for the caching of our stores
we set hands to digging. More white bear.
These fellows leave a formidable
impression in the mud or sand. Goodrich,
who is remarkably fond of fishing,
caught many trout of two different species.
Came to in a handsome timbered bottom
across from the entrance of a very
considerable river. Its character
is so precisely that of the one below
that the party with few exceptions
has pronounced it the Missouri.
The fork to the south is perfectly
transparent, runs rapidly with an even,
unriffled surface. Its bed is composed
of round, smooth stones like those of rivers
issuing from a mountainous country.
If this latter be the one we are to take
we should encounter within 50 miles
a series of precipitous falls.
There is now no timber on the hills.
The black rock has given place to a
yellow and brown or black clay, brown and
yellowish white sandstone and a hard, dark
freestone. It rises from the water
abruptly on both sides in varied walls.
I could discover above their horizon
only the most elevated points.
The river retains both its whitish color
and a proportion of its sediment,
but it is much clearer than below.
The banks afforded us good towing.
This method of ascending the river
is the safest and most expeditious.
We pass a great number of dry streambeds.
These plains being level and wholly
destitute of timber, the wind blows
violently with its loads of sand.
Driftwood comes down as the water rises.
The banks are falling in very fast
and I wonder that our pirogues are not
swallowed by them. Wild hyssop grows here.
A few cottonwood along the verges.
Undergrowths of rose and serviceberry,
and small-leafed willow on the sandbars.
Met this evening the famous white bear.
I had rather deal with several
indians than with this gentleman.
Much less ice running in the river.
We make ready to set out, the party
in general good health except for a few
venereal complaints. A windy,
blustering day. Our two pirogues still frozen.
I draw a connection of the country
from the information of traders.
The falls are about 800 miles west.
Rose early and commenced roofing
the two wings of huts. Our situation
sandy. Cottonwood and elm, some small ash.
We must now settle for the winter.
Very cold. Hard frosts. The river falling.
For several days we pass deserted
Mandan villages along both banks.
The beaver and otter are becoming more
abundant. We put ashore at noon,
setting fire to the prairies to signal
that we wish council with the natives.
These Arikara much reduced by pox.
It is customary for their nation
to show its grief by pain, some cutting off
two smaller fingers at the second joint.
The earth of the plains is in many places
opened in long crevices, its soil
indifferent and with a kind of timothy
branching like flax from its main stalk.
Delayed here today so as to take
equal altitudes, the weights of the
waters of the two rivers, their specific
gravities. As we near the great Platte,
the sandbars are more numerous, sawyers
worse than they were below. Mulberry,
oak and walnut. These prairies from the river
have very much the appearance of farms.
We continue to pole our way upstream.
Nothwithstanding our precautions, we
struck a bar and were near turning over.
The sergeants are directed each to keep
a journal of all passing occurrences
and such other descriptions of the country
as shall seem to them worthy of notice.
Our hunters report deer in every copse.
I got out and walked for one mile through a
rush bottom, nettles as high as my breast.
All the forepart of the day we were
arranging our company and taking on
those articles we will need. St. Charles.
The men spent their last night agreeably,
dancing with the French ladies, &c.
My ride was on a road finely shaded,
with now and then a good farm. The corn
in tassel, its leaves of a deep rich green
bending at the ends by their own weight.
Wheat and oat stubble. A hilly country.
I passed a toll-gate, and, looking back,
the buildings, the number of which was
ninety. A wooden bridge crosses the river
just below the town. Men were engaged in
racing their horses. I sought lodging
and was shown to bed in a large barrack
where a man and wife conversed with me
until I feigned sleep. This is a post town,
the mails arriving from both east and west
on Wednesdays and Saturdays. A young woman
gave me directions from an upstairs window.
I descended the hill into Frankfort.
There has lately been established a large
manufactory for spinning hemp and flax.
It is wrought by water and keeps in motion
1200 spindles. The streets of Lexington
cross at right angles, its stores filled both
with imports and with local goods: fine
cutlery, tin ware, muslins and nankeens.
I was so well put up that a man would be
fastidious to a fault to have found
the least thing wanting. Approaching the city
So I'm an alcoholic Catholic mother-lover
yet there is no sweetish nectar no fuzzed-peach
thing no song sing but in the word
which I'm starlessly unreachably faithful
you, pedant & you, politically righteous & you, alive
you think you can peal my sober word apart from my drunken word
word to comrade from my word to my mother
but all my words are one word my lives one
my last to first wound round in finally fiberless crystalline skein

I began as a drunkard & ended as a child
I began as an ordinary cruel lover & ended as a boy who
I began unnaturally subservient to my mother &
I began in a fatal hemorrhage & ended in a

Than any knows me or knows that word,
That word is the word when I say me bloated
The word that word I write perfectly lovingly

Or you say "he lost it" as if I (I so nothinged) could ever
The words are all only one word the perfect
My body my alcohol my pain my death are only
Tell it to you, poor sweet categorizers
Every me I was & wrote
That one perfect word

We forget where we came from. Our Jewish
names from the Exile give us away,
bring back the memory of flower and fruit, medieval cities,
metals, knights who turned to stone, roses,
spices whose scent drifted away, precious stones, lots of red,
handicrafts long gone from the world
(the hands are gone too).

Circumcision does it to us,
as in the Bible story of Shechem and the sons of Jacob,
so that we go on hurting all our lives.

What are we doing, coming back here with this pain?
Our longings were drained together with the swamps,
the desert blooms for us, and our children are beautiful.
Even the wrecks of ships that sank on the way
reached this shore,
even winds did. Not all the sails.

What are we doing
in this dark land with its
yellow shadows that pierce the eyes?
(Every now and then someone says, even after forty
or fifty years: "The sun is killing me.")

What are we doing with these souls of mist, with these names,
with our eyes of forests, with our beautiful children,
with our quick blood?

Spilled blood is not the roots of trees
but it's the closest thing to roots
we have.

These empty words are so remote. They are stories someone wants
To believe at the end of the century. Everyone gathers their sea of telluric
Pain to greet the beginning of the new world.

Cars stop and watch the deck chairs limp across the street to await
The coming of the new year. It is the end of summer and autumn and
Winters and springs, and panzer infatuation.

After four hundred eighty-one years, I cannot pull out the Spanish arrow
In my eye. Suddenly everything I knew was inhuman:
The oceans, the tadpoles in their new cars. The clams became
Cheerleaders. The palm trees, strippers, and everyone forgot,
Deer are the shapes of God.

His official language became Latin, when he ceased to be a Jew,
Biting his nails and collecting cans like a cheap minister with sunny gold teeth.
The tender years that once wore oysters would never speak to Him again.

The female spider became a lesbian, devouring our new long legs,
That would never again climb the toy steps our fathers left us. Although
Our legs are hairy and the lilies of a theater, the gentle lips of

How many aspirins will we take to reach the surface of truth?
My existence is for sale. The dawn is learning English.
The waves of the sea are unionizing.

The stones that were once our troubled hearts are eating chocolate.
I come to sell you fish, the bread in my blood and my existence.

a ladybug, its carapace blown open 
so a translucent trace of orange gleams 
from its body, has ascended link by link 
the smudgy silver curve of my watch band. 
It must have helicoptered past the sill 
while I was slumped here squinting in the paper 
at the ashen packaging another bombing's 
made of a minivan. Made available 
in the photo like the homeless in a poem. 
The pain is far away. But then for moments 
utterly clear: molten metal guttering 
down from the Milky Way to fall on us. 
And sometimes, God, it lands with all its will. 
My spluttered prayer for it to hold its distance: 
how ludicrous to blurt it from this comfort. 
Still it impels itself from me. Please stay 
away from me. Please stay away from this 
insectile soul who only weeks ago 

Just think! some night the stars will gleam 
And trace a name with silver beam, 

That night is speeding on to greet 
Your life is but a little beat 

A little gain, a little pain, 
A little blame, a little fame, 

It may be through some foreign grace, 
And unfamiliar charm of face; 
It may be that across the foam
By some strange spell, my Katie brought, 
Some English sunshine, warmth, and air! 
A thousand billowy leagues away 
From that green isle whose twilight skies
She seems to me, go where she will, 
An English girl in England still;

I meet her on the dusty street, 
And daisies spring about her feet;
Or, touched to life beneath her tread, 
An English cowslip lifts its head;
And, as to do her grace, rise up 
The primrose and the buttercup!
I roam with her through fields of cane, 
And seem to stroll an English lane, 
Which, white with blossoms of the May, 
Spreads its green carpet in her way! 
As fancy wills, the path beneath 
Is golden gorse, or purple heath: 
And now we hear in woodlands dim 
Their unarticulated hymn,
Now walk through rippling waves of wheat, 
Now sink in mats of clover sweet, 
Or see before us from the lawn 
The lark go up to greet the dawn! 
All birds that love the English sky 
Throng round my path when she is by: 
The blackbird from a neighboring thorn 
With music brims the cup of morn, 
And in a thick, melodious rain 
The mavis pours her mellow strain! 
Makes all the listening woods rejoice 
The passion of the nightingale!

Anon the pictures round her change, 
And through an ancient town we range, 
Whereto the shadowy memory clings 
And which to shrine his fading fame 
Still keeps his ashes and his name. 
Quaint houses rise on either hand, 
But still the airs are fresh and bland, 
As if their gentle wings caressed 
Some new-born village of the West. 
A moment by the Norman tower 
We pause; it is the Sabbath hour! 
As sweet as when in distant years 
She heard them peal with jocund din 
A merry English Christmas in! 
As round her, wearied with the taint 
Of Transatlantic pine and paint, 
She sees a thousand tokens cast 
Our reverent footsteps lastly claims 
The younger chapel of St. James, 
Which though, as English records run, 
Not old, had seen full many a sun, 
Ere to the cold December gale 
The sullen Pilgrim spread his sail. 
There Katie in her childish days
Spelt out her prayers and lisped her praise, 
And doubtless, as her beauty grew, 
Across the pews and down the aisle 
Sent many a beau-bewildering smile, 
Learned other things beside the creed! 
There, too, to-day her knee she bows, 
And by her one whose darker brows 
Betray the Southern heart that burns 
Beside her, and which only turns 
Its thoughts to Heaven in one request, 
Not all unworthy to be blest, 
But rising from an earthlier pain 
Than might beseem a Christian fane. 
Ah! can the guileless maiden share 
The wish that lifts that passionate prayer? 
Is all at peace that breast within? 
Good angels! warn her of the sin! 
Alas! what boots it? who can save 
A willing victim of the wave? 
Who cleanse a soul that loves its guilt? 
Or gather wine when wine is spilt?

We quit the holy house and gain 
The open air; then, happy twain, 
Adown familiar streets we go,
And now and then she turns to show, 
With fears that all is changing fast, 
Here by this way, through shadows cool,
A little maid, she tripped to school; 
And there each morning used to stop 
Before a wonder of a shop
Where, built of apples and of pears, 
Rose pyramids of golden spheres; 
While, dangling in her dazzled sight, 
Ripe cherries cast a crimson light, 
And made her think of elfin lamps, 
And feast and sport in fairy camps, 
Whereat, upon her royal throne 
(Most richly carved in cherry-stone), 
Titania ruled, in queenly state, 
Dismissed from books, she met the boys, 
Who, with a barbarous scorn of girls, 
Glanced slightly at her sunny curls, 
And laughed and leaped as reckless by 
As though no pretty face were nigh! 
That in a year, or haply twain, 
Few looked who failed to look again, 
And sooth to say, I little doubt 
(Some azure day, the truth will out!) 
That certain baits in certain eyes 
Caught many an unsuspecting prize; 
And somewhere underneath these eaves 
A budding flirt put forth its leaves!

Has not the sky a deeper blue, 
Have not the trees a greener hue,
And bend they not with lordlier grace
And nobler shapes above the place 
Where on one cloudless winter morn 
My Katie to this life was born? 
Ah, folly! long hath fled the hour 
When love to sight gave keener power, 
And lovers looked for special boons 
In brighter flowers and larger moons. 
But wave the foliage as it may, 
And let the sky be ashen gray, 
Thus much at least a manly youth
If near that blessed spot of earth 
No softer dews than usual rise, 
And life there keeps its wonted guise, 
Yet not the less that spot may seem 
And should a fervid faith incline 
To make thereof a sainted shrine, 
Who may deny that round us throng 
A hundred earthly creeds as wrong, 
But meaner far, which yet unblamed 
Stalk by us and are not ashamed. 
So, therefore, Katie, as our stroll 
Ends at this portal, while you roll 
Those lustrous eyes to catch each ray 
That may recall some vanished day,
Stoop down and kiss the sacred sill!

So strongly sometimes on the sense 
These fancies hold their influence,
That in long well-known streets I stray 
Like one who fears to lose his way. 
The stranger, I, the native, she,
Myself, not Kate, have crossed the sea; 
And changing place, and mixing times, 
I walk in unfamiliar climes!
These houses, free to every breeze 
That blows from warm Floridian seas,
Assume a massive English air,
And close around an English square; 
While, if I issue from the town, 
An English hill looks greenly down, 
Or round me rolls an English park, 
And in the Broad I hear the Larke! 
Thus when, where woodland violets hide, 
I rove with Katie at my side,
It scarce would seem amiss to say, 
Beyond the pathless waste of brine, 
In a young land of palm and pine! 
There, by the tropic heats, the soul 
Is touched as if with living coal, 
And glows with such a fire as none 
Can feel beneath a Northern sun, 
Such is the land in which I live, 
And, Katie! such the soul I give. 
Come! ere another morning beam, 
And soon, despite of storm or calm, 
Beneath my native groves of palm,
Kind friends shall greet, with joy and pride, 

Kind are her answers,
  But her performance keeps no day;
  Breaks time, as dancers
  From their own music when they stray:
  All her free favors
And smooth words wing my hopes in vain.
O did ever voice so sweet but only feign?
  Can true love yield such delay,
  Converting joy to pain?

  Lost is our freedom,
  When we submit to women so:
  When in their best they work our woe?
  There is no wisdom
Can alter ends, by Fate prefixed.
O why is the good of man with evil mixed?
  Never were days yet called two,
  But one night went betwixt.

Lady could pour you a song,
Coffee and a little cream.
Stir it the whole night long
Into a brown-sugar dream.

Lady could wrap you a note
Sometimes Manhattan satin,
Always Harlem delight.

Lady Day could sing it
Like nobody ever has
At the Shim Sham Club, Hot Cha Cha,
Joints that swung on jazz.

Her bittersweet songs told Heartbreak,
Meet your sister Pain,
But Lady melted yesterdays
Into beautiful rain. 

Version 1 (1921) 
Yours is the shame and sorrow,
     But the disgrace is mine;
Your love was dark and thorough,
Mine was the love of the sun for a flower
     He creates with his shine.

I was diligent to explore you,
     Blossom you stalk by stalk,
Till my fire of creation bore you
Shrivelling down in the final dour

I knew your pain, and it broke
     My fine, craftsman's nerve;
Your body quailed at my stroke,
And my courage failed to give you the last
     Fine torture you did deserve.

You are shapely, you are adorned,
     But opaque and dull in the flesh,
Who, had I but pierced with the thorned
Fire-threshing anguish, were fused and cast
     In a lovely illumined mesh.

Like a painted window: the best
     Suffering burnt through your flesh,
Undrossed it and left it blest
With a quivering sweet wisdom of grace: but now
     Who shall take you afresh?

Now who will burn you free
     From your body's terrors and dross,
Since the fire has failed in me?
What man will stoop in your flesh to plough
     The shrieking cross?

A mute, nearly beautiful thing
     Is your face, that fills me with shame
As I see it hardening,
Warping the perfect image of God,
     And darkening my eternal fame.

Version 2 (1928) 
Yours is the sullen sorrow,
     The disgrace is also mine;
Your love was intense and thorough,
Mine was the love of a growing flower
     For the sunshine.

You had the power to explore me,
Blossom me stalk by stalk;
You woke my spirit, you bore me
To consciousness, you gave me the dour

Body to body I could not
     Love you, although I would.
We kissed, we kissed though we should not.
You yielded, we threw the last cast,
     And it was no good.

You only endured, and it broke
     My craftsman's nerve.
No flesh responded to my stroke;
So I failed to give you the last
     Fine torture you did deserve.

You are shapely, you are adorned
     But opaque and null in the flesh;
Who, had I but pierced with the thorned
Full anguish, perhaps had been cast
     In a lovely illuinined mesh

Like a painted window; the best
     Fire passed through your flesh,
Undrossed it, and left it blest
In clean new awareness. But now
     Who shall take you afresh?

Now who will burn you free
     From your body's deadness and dross?
Since the fire has failed in me,
What man will stoop in your flesh to plough
     The shrieking cross?

A mute, nearly beautiful thing
     Is your face, that fills me with shame
As I see it hardening;
I should have been cruel enough to bring
     You through the flame.

And the clarity, amiability of North French air.
Music's delight to please the poet pack-marching there.
As the doors glide shut behind me, 
I exist again, recover myself, 
sunlight undimmed by dark panes, 
The wind tongues me to my feet
like a doe licking clean her newborn fawn. 
At my back, days measured by vital signs, 
my mouth opened and arm extended, 
the nighttime cries of a man withered 
child-size by cancer, and the bells
of emptied IVs tolling through hallways. 
holding off pain with its muscular wings. 
As I step to the curb, an orange moth 
dives into the basket of roses
that lately stood on my sickroom table, 
and the petals yield to its persistent 
nudge, opening manifold and golden.

I.

     The class consists of one member.

    The lamp-light falls on blackened walls,
        And streams through narrow perforations,
        With slow-decaying oscillations.
Flow, current, flow, set the quick light-spot flying,
Flow current, answer light-spot, flashing, quivering, dying,

    O look! how queer! how thin and clear,
        And thinner, clearer, sharper growing
    The gliding fire! with central wire,
        The fine degrees distinctly showing.
Swing, magnet, swing, advancing and receding,

    O love! you fail to read the scale
        Correct to tenths of a division.
    To mirror heaven those eyes were given,
        And not for methods of precision.
Break contact, break, set the free light-spot flying;
Break contact, rest thee, magnet, swinging, creeping, dying.

     II.

        Remarks submitted to the Lecturer by a student

Prim Doctor of Philosophy
    Front academic Heidelberg!
Your sum of vital energy
    Is not the millionth of an erg.
Your liveliest motion might be reckoned
At one Tenth-metre in a second.

    Which scientific thought expresses,
The air, and I may add the ocean,

Atoms, you told me, were discrete,
    Than you they could not be discreter,
Who know how many Millions meet
    Within a cubic millimetre.
They clash together as they fly,

And when in tuning my guitar
    The interval would not come right,
And then you told me, as I sang,
What overtones were in my clang.

You gabbled on, but every phrase
    Was stiff with scientific shoddy,
The only song you deigned to praise

    By torsion of a wrist so supple;

Were every hair of every tress
    (Which you, no doubt, imagine mine),
    A stress, say, of a megadyne,
That tension I would sooner suffer
Than meet again with such a duffer!

When I was little I cut off the heads
strengthened my ability to make a
stand-firm surface. A steady gaze will drive
conflicted information away, back to the
here the morning after, wracked in a
private shame too awful to admit and
of no consequence at all. I work very hard
not to let myself go. Any channel
can tell. Due process appears in beauty
and misgiving at once; an agility
borne from creative malice, a benign
insecurity. The plain truth: I forget
the curtains are open sometimes and the
hands wander. The room stares back from its things:
They understand the end of the world, will
not waste time feeling your pain, and every-
thing tragic in between need not be known.
I want them in the way, things to burst through
corollaries to be roped and tackled
by surprise, get killed, and thank you. One fate
to this scripted conversation, though I
may play along. Identity theft accepting
renewal orders, copycat pre-emptive attacks
an obscure murder string on the public
glide by sight, the victim a John doughnut
pining for leadership from the passenger seat.
The threat of meaning reassures: I know
Can I defect back to curiosity
in the moonlight, stone rabbit? Hit on by
Echo, I go cold for the love of my
own exile, and while I hope, my flesh
explodes into an arrangement of stars
hear, just their corresponding holes in the sky.

In the sad November time, 
When the leaf has left the lime, 
And the Cam, with sludge and slime, 
While, with sober step and slow, 
Round about the marshes low, 
Stiffening students stumping go 

Then to me in doleful mood 
Rises up a question rude, 
Asking what sufficient good 
Moping on from day to day, 
Till the jaded brain gives way 

Why should wretched Man employ 
Years which Nature meant for joy, 
Striving vainly to destroy 
Still the injured powers remain 
Endless stores of hopeless pain, 
When at last the vanquished brain 

All the schemes that Hope designed? 
Gone, like spring, to leave behind 
Thus he ends his helpless days, 

Happier those whom trifles please, 
Dreaming out a life of ease, 
Sinking by unfelt degrees 
Or the slave, to labour born, 
Destined to be slowly worn 

Thus a tempting spirit spoke, 
As from troubled sleep I woke 
To a morning thick with smoke, 
Then to sleep I turned once more, 
Eyes inflamed and windpipe sore, 
Dreaming dreams I dreamt before, 

In my dream methought I strayed 
Where a learned-looking maid 
Stores of flimsy goods displayed, 
Warranted, when kept with care, 

Then unnumbered witlings, caught 
By her wiles, the trappings bought, 
And by labour, not by thought, 
While the men of wiser mind 
Passed for blind among the blind; 
Pedants left them far behind 

Ever on the nearest prize 
Well may venture to despise 
Pedantry is in demand! 
Buy it up at second-hand, 
Seek no more to understand 

Thus the gaudy gowns were sold, 
Cast off sloughs of pedants old; 
Proudly marched the students bold 
Till their trappings, false though fair, 
Mouldered off and left them bare, 
Clustering close in blank despair, 

Boast that by their formal rules 
They produce more learned fools 
Learned fools they are indeed, 
Learned in the books they read; 

And would raise their purblind eyes 
To the opening mysteries 
Truth should spring from sterile ground, 
Beauty beam from all around, 
Right should then at last be found 

Shagged-gold, at rest the great haunches
as if axled, fur sleeked like a butter rug.
like a solar system, each lady kept
exclusive, her seasonal heat for him alone,
estrous belly pressed to the ground,
nicking his breached mate as he dismounts.
See the deliberate walk, cool as a criminal,
the multi-jointed forepaws placed consciously
even by the usurped king, his eye teeth blacked,
his tail rotted off, tired wag of a bloody stump
as he finally falls dying, the crucified face bedded
in its wheel of hair, the tawny miscegenated eyes
binocular in breadth. Shark in the long grasses.
Shark in the long grass. Smell everywhere, the gazelle
with its small-headed splendor gracing the plains
is ambushed, devoured, its horned bone rack
the three in the iron cage lazing like statues.
When the American unlocks the hinged door
our shackled hearts contract. Unhooded and naked
we are pushed into their presence,
and for a shining moment the animals study us,
these fabulous aliens.
Here in a desert captivity
their swagged bellies shifted, broken, and resignedly
its head wreathed beyond sorrow
as it slouched out of the habitual darkness,
the permanent rictus of its terrible mouth
pain-struck. The thing came toward me
with its ruined light, and I saw affliction in it.
Dream of mastery. Dream of being wholly consumed,
freed. I am the lion and the lion is me.
Then the American pulls us out.

It was a poem

political poems

---------------------------

Destroy another
is war for? So

each of you does. dies in

for the pain you experience
and nothing is established

Because I am a woman

without ties?

---------------------------

Dance little asshole dance
Men, I have these guts.

---------------------------

regions to the destruction
doing it. Having proceeded by

the logic
you will perceive your continued
as you have. And so one continues.

-----------------------------

Lead the boy out of

What else is there to

he is a screaming fire

-----------------------------

the long mirror on the right-hand wall of the
corridor suddenly shattered

-----------------------------

I repeat that I am not frightened
are supposed to be.

-----------------------------

O foolish wisdom sought in books! 

For there the grand hills, summer-crowned, 
One hour of rest upon their breast 

Their cool, soft green to ease the pain 

And I could kiss, with longing wild, 
A grass-blade fanned across my hand, 

The trees would talk with me; the flowers 
The olden lore revived once more, 

And as the pardoned pair might come 
And hear Him call at even-fall, 

So I, from out these toils, wherein 

Listen closely as I sing this. The man standing at the gate
tottering on his remaining limb is a kind of metronome, his one
leg planted firmly on the earth. Yes, I have made him beautiful
because I aim to lay all my cards on the table. In the book review
Did she want us to let her be, or does she want
to be there walking the grounds of the old prison on the hill
of the poison tree where comparatively a paltry twenty thousand
died? In the first room with the blown up
black-and-white of a human body gone abstract someone has
to turn and face the wall not because of the human pain
represented in the photo but because of her calmness,
the tranquility with which she tells us that her father
and her sister and her brother were killed. In graduate school
a whole workshop devoted to an image of a woman with bleach
thrown in the face and the question of whether or not
soldiers. In the room papered with photos of the Khmer Rouge
picture after picture of teenagers, children whose parents
were killed so that they would be left alone in the world
to do the grisly work that precedes paradise.
And the photos of the victims, the woman holding her newborn
in her arms as her head is positioned in a vise, in this case
the vise an instrument not of torture
but of documentation, the head held still as the camera captures
the image, the thing linking all their faces, the abject fear
and total hopelessness as exists
in only a handful of places in the history of the visible world.
For three $US per person she will guide you through what was
Tuol Sleng prison, hill of the strychnine tree.
Without any affectation she will tell you the story of how
her father and her sister and her brother went among
the two million dead. There are seventy-four forms
of poetry in this country and each one is still meant to be sung.

The bedroom hot as a bakery,
To meet tomorrow, and afterwards,
And the usual pain, like dysentery.

And me supposed to be ignorant,
Or find it funny, or not to care,
Even ... but why put it into words?
Isolate rather this element

Something to do with violence
And arrogant eternity.

Love's last urgency is earth
and grief is all gravity

and the long fall always
back to earliest hours

that exist nowhere
but in one's brain.

From the hard-packed
pile of old-mown grass,

from boredom, from pain,
a boy's random slash

unlocks a dark ardor
of angry bees

that link the trees
and block his way home.

I like to hold him holding me,
mystery mastering fear,

so young, standing unstung
under what survives of sky.

I learned too late how to live.
Child, teach me how to die.

Be large with those small fears. The whole sky
has fallen on you and all you can do about it is
shout, dragging your fear-ettes by their pinked ears.
They dance a number now: consequence without
sequence. Lovingly broadminded in their
realization and ruin, expert at the parting shot.
Not so small after all, we micro to
macro, swelling to the horror shows
lifted from the sly ways of life.
You, both scorched and shining in the terror
of the equivocal moment, its box of cheeky
logics rattling cold certainties out of bounds
A little debauched, the flirt in a freckling,
wondering spun to falling comes to this
pert contract of a paradox: saying things
because they will do no good, ringing change
in frumpy mono-determination, fruity and fruitless.
Exploded out of shelter, the tides come roaring in.
Let in the hoarse Cassandras and the dull pain of the
We thought them disconcerting at first,
having exchanged etiquette for energy.
Yesterday you say everything for their own sake,
and soon enough, tomorrow, you learn a lot from them.

To claim, at a dead party, to have spotted a grackle, 
Your reputation for saying things of interest 
Will not be marred, if you hasten to other topics, 
Nor will the delicate web of human trust 
Be ruptured by that airy fabrication. 
Later, however, talking with toxic zest 
Of golf, or taxes, or the rest of it 
Where the beaked ladle plies the chuckling ice, 
You may enjoy a chill of severance, hearing 
Above your head the shrug of unreal wings. 
Not that the world is tiresome in itself: 
We know what boredom is: it is a dull 
Impatience or a fierce velleity, 
A champing wish, stalled by our lassitude, 
To make or do. In the strict sense, of course, 
We invent nothing, merely bearing witness 
To what each morning brings again to light: 
Gold crosses, cornices, astonishment 
Of panes, the turbine-vent which natural law 
Then grass and grackles or, at the end of town 
Clothed with its usual thunder, and the stones 
Beginning now to tug their shadows in 
And track the air with glitter. All these things 
Are there before us; there before we look 
Or fail to look; there to be seen or not 
According to our means and purposes. 
So too with strangeness not to be ignored, 
Total eclipse or snow upon the rose, 
And so with that most rare conception, nothing. 
What is it, after all, but something missed? 
It is the water of a dried-up well 
Gone to assail the cliffs of Labrador. 
There is what galled the arch-negator, sprung 
From Hell to probe with intellectual sight 
The cells and heavens of a given world 
Which he could take but as another prison: 
Small wonder that, pretending not to be, 
He drifted through the bar-like boles of Eden 
In a black mist low creeping, dragging down 
And darkening with moody self-absorption 
What, when he left it, lifted and, if seen 
Closer to making than the deftest fraud 
To counterpoise, on the mock-orange spray, 
Its light, up-tilted spine; or, lighter still, 
How the shucked tunic of an onion, brushed 
To one side on a backlit chopping-board 
And rocked by trifling currents, prints and prints 
Its bright, ribbed shadow like a flapping sail. 
Odd that a thing is most itself when likened: 
The eye mists over, basil hints of clove, 
The river glazes toward the dam and spills 
To the drubbed rocks below its crashing cullet, 
And in the barnyard near the sawdust-pile 
Some great thing is tormented. Either it is 
A tarp torn loose and in the groaning wind 
Now puffed, now flattened, or a hip-shot beast 
Which tries again, and once again, to rise. 
What, though for pain there is no other word, 
Finds pleasure in the cruellest simile? 
From neighbor bushes in the grey of morning 
That, harsh or sweet, and of its own accord, 
Proclaims its many kin. It is a chant 
Of the first springs, and it is tributary 
To the great lies told with the eyes half-shut 
That have the truth in view: the tale of Chiron 
Who, with sage head, wild heart, and planted hoof 
Instructed brute Achilles in the lyre, 
Or of the garden where we first mislaid 
Simplicity of wish and will, forgetting 
Out of what cognate splendor all things came 
To take their scattering names; and nonetheless 
That matter of a baggage-train surprised 
By a few Gascons in the Pyrenees 
Which, having worked three centuries and more 
In the dark caves of France, poured out at last 
The blood of Roland, who to Charles his king 
And to the dove that hatched the dove-tailed world 
Was faithful unto death, and shamed the Devil.

Thick throng the snow-flakes, the evening is dreary,
Glad rings the music in yonder gay hall;
On her who listens here, friendless and weary,

At yon clear window, light-opened before me,
Glances the face I have worshipped so well:
There, the fair smile by whose sweetness I fell.

This is akin to him, shunned and forsaken,
That at my bosom sobs low, without bread;
Had not such pleading my marble heart shaken,
I had been quiet, long since, with the dead.

Oh! Could I enter there, ghastly and squalid,
Show them where roses bloomed, crushed now and pallid,

How the fair ladies would fail from their dances,
Trembling, aghast at my horrible tale!
How would he shrink from my words and my glances!
How would they shrink from him, swooning and pale!

This is the hair that was soft to enchain him;
Snakelike, it snarls on my beautiless brow:
These are the hands that were fond to detain him
With a sense-magic then, powerless now!

No: could I come, like a ghost, to affright him,
How should that heal my wound, silence my pain?
That could not bring me my lost peace again.

When he comes forth, with his young bride beside him,
Here shall they find us both, dead in the cold.

Come hither, Sleep, 
But lo! the morning peeps 
And the rustling birds of dawn 
The earth do scorn. 

Lo! to the vault 
With sorrow fraught 
They strike the ear of night, 
They make mad the roaring winds, 

After night I do croud, 
I turn my back to the east, 
From whence comforts have increas'd; 
For light doth seize my brain 
With frantic pain.

Here, in the darkness, where this plaster saint
And one small candle shines, but not so faint
Is that why I see Monty now? equal to any saint, poor boy, as good as gold,
But still, with just the proper trace
Of earthliness on his shining wedding face;
And then gone suddenly blank and old
The hateful day of the divorce:
Stuart got his, hands down, of course
He was the first, he stands out clearer than the rest.
But, up there, from your still, star-lighted tree
Watching black shadows on green lawns and red carnations burning in the sun,
If it is Your will that we should be content with the tame, bloodless things.
And throwing out the youngest smile, shy, but half haughty and half sweet.
All that was left of oh! the loveliest face, by time and grief!
That is not always true: there was my Mother (well at least the dead are free!) 
If there were fifty heavens God could not give us back the child who went or never came;
Yes, it may be, when He has shorn, led us to slaughter, torn the bleating soul in us to rags,
And they are not gone, yet, for me, the lights, the colours, the perfumes,
To know how jewels taste, just as I used to think
There was the scent in every red and yellow rose
With, upstairs, in the blue and gold box of a room, just the maids' footsteps overhead,
She had sat staring, with dry eyes, at this and that man going past
And while her perfume clung to You from head to feet all through the day
One breath, one throbbing quietness, as if the thing behind our lips was endless life,
It is the only truth: it is the dream in us that neither life nor death nor any other
And He has never shared with me my haunted house beneath the trees
Of Eden and Calvary, with its ghosts that have not any eyes for tears,
And the happier guests who would not see, or if they did, remember these,

 once made her very proud. These days, I do
 so she can take a break from all the chores
 she now refuses to assign to me. 
 thin steam, her squint of disapproval more 
 denial than it is disgust. She hears
 to keep out vision than it is to clear 
 that stultifies her senses too. Enraged
 why suddenly she looks so stunned 
 a towel noiselessly. I know she thinks
 that taking estrogen in pills is not 
 what God intended, no matter what 
 The oven timer rings. The cookies that

Why should a foolish marriage vow,
      Which long ago was made,
Oblige us to each other now
      When passion is decay'd?
We lov'd, and we lov'd, as long as we could,
      Till our love was lov'd out in us both:
But our marriage is dead, when the pleasure is fled:
      'Twas pleasure first made it an oath.

If I have pleasures for a friend,
      And farther love in store,
What wrong has he whose joys did end,
      And who could give no more?
'Tis a madness that he should be jealous of me,
      Or that I should bar him of another:
For all we can gain is to give our selves pain,
      When neither can hinder the other.

Because the ostracized experience the world 
in ways peculiar to themselves, often seeing it 
clearly yet with such anger and longing 
that they sometimes enlarge what they see, 
she at first saw Brigantine as a paradise for gulls. 
She must be a horseshoe crab washed ashore. 

How startling, though, no one knew about her past, 
the scandal with Percy, the tragic early deaths, 
yet sad that her Frankenstein had become 
just a name, like Dracula or Satan, something 
that stood for a kind of scariness, good for a laugh. 
She found herself welcome everywhere. 

People would tell her about Brigantine Castle, 
turned into a house of horror. They thought 
she'd be pleased that her monster roamed 
its dark corridors, making children scream. 
They lamented the day it was razed. 
Thus Mary Shelley found herself accepted 

the most frightening people alive, she thought. 
Didn't they know Frankenstein had abandoned 
his creation, set him loose without guidance 
or a name? Didn't they know what it feels like 
to be lost, freaky, forever seeking who you are? 

She was amazed now that people believed 
you could shop for everything you might need. 
She loved that in the dunes you could almost hide. 
At the computer store she asked an expert 
if there was such a thing as too much knowledge, 
or going too far? He directed her to a website 

where he thought the answers were. 
Yet Mary Shelley realized that the pain she felt 
all her life was gone. Could her children, dead so young, 
be alive somewhere, too? She couldn't know 
that only her famous mother had such a chance. 
She was almost ready to praise this awful world.

After long grief and pain
To find the arms of my true love
Round me once again!...

A shadow flits before me,
Not thou, but like to thee:
Ah, Christ! that it were possible
For one short hour to see
The souls we loved, that they might tell us
What and where they be!

What links are ours with orbs that are
      So resolutely far:
The solitary asks, and they
Give radiance as from a shield:
      Still at the death of day,
      The seen, the unrevealed.
      Implacable they shine
To us who would of Life obtain
An answer for the life we strain
      To nourish with one sign.
Nor can imagination throw
The penetrative shaft: we pass
The breath of thought, who would divine
      If haply they may grow
As Earth; have our desire to know;
If life comes there to grain from grass,
And flowers like ours of toil and pain;
      Has passion to beat bar,
      Win space from cleaving brain;
      The mystic link attain,
      Whereby star holds on star.

Those visible immortals beam
      Allurement to the dream:
Ireful at human hungers brook
      No question in the look.
For ever virgin to our sense,
Remote they wane to gaze intense:
Prolong it, and in ruthlessness they smite
The beating heart behind the ball of sight:
      Till we conceive their heavens hoar,
      Those lights they raise but sparkles frore,
And Earth, our blood-warm Earth, a shuddering prey
To that frigidity of brainless ray.
      Yet space is given for breath of thought
      Beyond our bounds when musing: more
      When to that musing love is brought,
      And love is asked of love's wherefore.
      'Tis Earth's, her gift; else have we nought:
      Her gift, her secret, here our tie.
And not with her and yonder sky?
Bethink you: were it Earth alone
Breeds love, would not her region be
      The sole delight and throne
      Of generous Deity?

      To deeper than this ball of sight
Appeal the lustrous people of the night.
Fronting yon shoreless, sown with fiery sails,
      It is our ravenous that quails,
Flesh by its craven thirsts and fears distraught.
           The spirit leaps alight,
           Doubts not in them is he,
The binder of his sheaves, the sane, the right:
      Of magnitude to magnitude is wrought,
To feel it large of the great life they hold:
      In them to come, or vaster intervolved,
The issues known in us, our unsolved solved:
      That there with toil Life climbs the self-same Tree,
Whose roots enrichment have from ripeness dropped.
So may we read and little find them cold:
  Let it but be the lord of Mind to guide
Our eyes; no branch of Reason's growing lopped;
Nor dreaming on a dream; but fortified
By day to penetrate black midnight; see,
Hear, feel, outside the senses; even that we,
The specks of dust upon a mound of mould,
We who reflect those rays, though low our place,
      To them are lastingly allied.

So may we read, and little find them cold:
Not frosty lamps illumining dead space,
Not distant aliens, not senseless Powers.
The fire is in them whereof we are born;
The music of their motion may be ours.
Spirit shall deem them beckoning Earth and voiced
Sisterly to her, in her beams rejoiced.
Of love, the grand impulsion, we behold
           The love that lends her grace
           Among the starry fold.
Then at new flood of customary morn,
Look at her through her showers,
      Her mists, her streaming gold,
A wonder edges the familiar face:
She wears no more that robe of printed hours;
Half strange seems Earth, and sweeter than her flowers.

Save these words for a while because
of something they remind you of
although you cannot remember
what that is a sense that is part
dust and part the light of morning

you were about to say a name
and it is not there I forget
them too I am learning to pray
to Perdita to whom I said
nothing at the time and now she
cannot hear me as far as I
know but the day goes on looking

the names often change more slowly
than the meanings whole families
grow up in them and then are gone
into the anonymous sky
oh Perdita does the hope go on
after the names are forgotten

and is the pain of the past done
when the calling has stopped and those
betrayals so long repeated
that they are taken for granted
as the shepherd does with the sheep

It's tough being a guy, having to be gruff
and buff, the strong silent type, having to laugh
and say No big deal, take a ride, listen to enough
when you love something or someone, scuffing
pulled up nose high, an eyebrow raised for the word quaff
yes, the tie around the neck, the starched white cuffs
too long, too short, frayed, frilled, rolled up. The self
of something difficult to define or defend. Chief or chef,
thief or roofer, serf or sheriff, feet on the earth or aloof.
Son, brother, husband, lover, father, they are different
from us, except when they fall or stand alone on a wharf.

They shall not return to us, the resolute, the young, 
But the men who left them thriftily to die in their own dung, 

They shall not return to us, the strong men coldly slain 
But the men who edged their agonies and chid them in their pain, 

But the idle-minded overlings who quibbled while they died, 

Shall we only threaten and be angry for an hour? 
How softly but how swiftly they have sidled back to power 

Even while they soothe us, while they promise large amends, 
Do they call upon their debtors, and take counsel with their friends, 

But the slothfulness that wasted and the arrogance that slew, 

He wanted to stay home and play.
So lied to his dad and said he felt bad
And stayed home from school one day.

The very next day he decided to say
That his stomach felt a bit queasy.

At the end of the week, his dad kissed his cheek

But his doctor could find nothing wrong.
He said it was best to let Michael rest,
Until he felt healthy and strong.

Or to read or to spell or do anything well,

Don't be a fool and stay home from school,
Or the same thing could happen to you!

Children I think removed to many places, 
Lost among hushed years, and so strangely known. 

This business is well ended. If in the dark 
Bed him no more. From corners of the lawn 
The dusk-white dresses flutter and are past. 

After, and as the sullenness of time 
If I had not forever, if there were time.

Pain trains an undisciplined mind. 

Little feet, little feet are playing 
Hopscotch among the landmines. 

Hope has worked miracles before. 

I could have learned to welcome night, 

How dare you put words in God's mouth, 

Under Mirabeau Bridge the river slips away
Joy came always after pain

We're face to face and hand in hand
Eternal tired tidal eyes

Love elapses like the river
And expectation always violent

The days and equally the weeks elapse
Under Mirabeau Bridge the river slips away

What do we do when we hate our bodies?
A good coat helps.
Some know how to pull off a hat.

And there are paints, lighting, knives, needles,
various kinds of resignation,
the laugh in the mirror, the lie

There is also the company we keep:
surgeons and dermatologists,

faith healers and instruction-givers,
tailors of cashmere and skin
who send their bills for holding

our shame-red hands, raw
from the slipping rope,
the same hands with which we tremble

ever so slightly, holding novels in bed,
concentrating on the organization
of pain and joy

we say is another mirror,
a depth, a conjure in which we might meet
someone who says touch me.

I. Pledge Sister
drawn by a slow child. Because they can eat without
a ringing in their ears. They can ask for gravy.
aiming at their heads. The pills I suck are like me:
pink, fizzy, and totally legal. They turn listening to noise
into a type of eating.
Everyone wants to know about my pubic hair.
but what they really want is the food melting on the fork
when they finally say none for me, thanks. They worship
Everyone likes it when I finally die in the magazine article:
the cries no one heard, the love I needed massaged
into my hamburger meat. No one knows I am the flower,
the bee, the wind, the rain, the dirt: all the vectors.
No one knows how well I sleep, how well I lie in bed
not sleeping. I run and sharpen
the bones of my face. The other girls say
for the chisel I would take to the human race.
II. Spring Break
you can drop me from a second-story window
A couple nights later, on a busy street, I recognized his walk
the way a mouse must recognize a hole it used last winter.
Sure, I wish the universe could clear its throat.
always being the sun. A few nights ago he peeled off of me
But afterwards he kissed me as if to apologize
for every brutal thing he was strong enough to have just done.
Later he walked me across town, and we ended up
in an expensive place, in the middle
of a loud song. He looked right at me
the whole time, as if I were still the one thing he would choose,
and was clearly broken.
III. The Essay
It is dumb to know what one has longing for.
I, too, wonder what I am happy about.
There is always something natural in pieces
like sand or snow. If early Western cultures
had perceived the surface of the day as wrapping around them like a shell,
Not exactly me, not exactly here, not exactly now. The world spreads out
from how we look at one thing. I tell myself this and then I look at things for hours.
IV. Fifth-Year Senior
makes me nervous. That and I wish I knew what I will act like
later today. I watch myself being kind sometimes
these are all things you pick up and carry.
Lately, I pick up the lightest things. I am floating and honored
to drag myself back and forth like a huge feather
across my sleeping boyfriend. He thanks me
by actually changing under my touch. He is smooth
and I worry that I barely feel him,
but doing things no one should see
seems the only good use of my time. He buys me
jewelry I never wear. I love it because it piles up, which proves
and summer is seeping in under the doors.
My friend says people are wrong about us.
I get them.
V. Graduation Address
I like to be at the end and look back
at the beginning and see all
the stupidity there.
I think we are young.
The posters all say so,
and though no one ever officially
joined our clubs, we designed many logos.
The beautiful, dumb girl you loved
was everyone at our lecture,
and what a strange boy we all were in the corner
with our walking stick, talking too much
about the board games back home.
Many of you were next to me at the talk where I became
hyper-aware of the creeping in my heart.
As you know, I became obsessed
with the on and off inside my chest.
Failure seems to be one half of the deal, which is why
I have occasionally climbed on top of some of you
and then left the room. But there is another way
to look at it: like you, I am a house
for a wet animal that is sneaking up
on something it is terrified by. What is that something?

It ended, and the morrow brought the task.
Her eyes were guilty gates, that let him in
By shutting all too zealous for their sin:
Each sucked a secret, and each wore a mask.
But, oh, the bitter taste her beauty had!
He sickened as at breath of poison-flowers:
A languid humour stole among the hours,
And if their smiles encountered, he went mad,
And raged deep inward, till the light was brown
Before his vision, and the world, forgot,
Looked wicked as some old dull murder-spot.
A star with lurid beams, she seemed to crown
The pit of infamy: and then again
He fainted on his vengefulness, and strove
To ape the magnanimity of love,
And smote himself, a shuddering heap of pain.

Love ere he bleeds, an eagle in high skies,
Has earth beneath his wings: from reddened eve
He views the rosy dawn. In vain they weave
The fatal web below while far he flies.
But when the arrow strikes him, there's a change.
He moves but in the track of his spent pain,
Whose red drops are the links of a harsh chain,
Binding him to the ground, with narrow range.
A subtle serpent then has Love become.
I had the eagle in my bosom erst:
Henceforward with the serpent I am cursed.
I can interpret where the mouth is dumb.
Speak, and I see the side-lie of a truth.
Perchance my heart may pardon you this deed:
You must bear all the venom of his tooth!

Called out of dream by the pitch and screech,  
set free of its pincurls, springing out 
into the still and hurtling air 
above the front seat and just as suddenly gone.  
The space around us twisted, 
and in the instant before the crash 
I heard the bubbling of the chickens, 
the homely racket they make at all speeds,  
signifying calm, resignation, oblivion. 

And I listened. All through the slash 
and clatter, the rake of steel, shatter of glass,  
I listened, and what came 
was a blizzard moan in the wind, a wail  
of wreckage, severed hoses and lives, 
a storm of loose feathers, and in the final  
whirl approximating calm, the cluck  
and fracas of the birds. I crawled 
on hands and knees where a window should  
have been and rose uneven 

in November dusk. Wind blew 
a snow of down, and rows of it quivered along  
the shoulder. One thin stream of blood 
oozed, flocked in feathers. 
This was in the Ozarks, on a road curving miles  
around Missouri, and as far as I could 
see, no light flickered through the timber,  
no mail box leaned the flag 
of itself toward pavement, no cars 
seemed ever likely to come along. 

So I walked, circled the darkening disaster  
my life had come to, and cried. 
I cried for my family there, 
knotted in the snarl of metal and glass;  
for the farmer, looking dead, half in 
and half out of his windshield; and for myself,  
ambling barefoot through the jeweled debris,  
glass slitting little blood-stars in my soles,  
my arm hung loose at the elbow 
and whispering its prophecies of pain. 

Around and around the tilted car 
and the steaming truck, around the heap 
of exploded crates, the smears and small hunks  
of chicken and straw. Through 
an hour of loneliness and fear 
I walked, in the almost black of Ozark night,  
the moon just now burning into Missouri. Behind me,  
the chickens followed my lead, 
some fully upright, pecking 

the dim pavement for suet or seed, 
some half-hobbled by their wounds, worthless wings  
fluttering in the effort. The faintest 
light turned their feathers phosphorescent, 
and as I watched they came on, as though they believed  
me some savior, some highwayman 
or commando come to save them the last night  
of their clucking lives. This, they must have 
this the rendering more efficient than the axe, 

the execution more anonymous than 
a wringing arm. I walked on, no longer crying, 
and soon the amiable and distracted chattering came  
again, a sound like chuckling, or the backward suck  
of hard laughter. And we walked  
to the cadence their clucking called,  
a small boy towing a cloud around a scene  
of death, coming round and round  
like a dream, or a mountain road,  
like a pincurl, like pulse, like life.

The tortures of lumbago consumed Aunt Madge, 
And Leah Vest, once resigned from schoolmarming, 
Could not be convinced to leave the house, 
And Mrs. Mary Hogan, after birthing her fifth son, 

Lay bedfast for the last fifty-two years of her life, 
Reporting shooting pains that would begin 
High in her back and shear downward to the feet, 
As though, she said, she had been glazed in lightning; 

And also, men, broken on bridges and mills, 
Leldon Kilpatrick, Johnson Suggs, Whitey Carlyle: 
They came and sat there too, leafing through 

Yellowing Pageants and Progressive Farmers; 
And, one by one, all entered in and talked 
While the good doctor gargled a dark chaff 
In his pipe and took down symptoms, 

Numbness, neuralgia, the knotted lymph, 

And scrawl out his unfailing barbiturate prescription 
To be filled by his pharmacist brother-in-law 
The quantum ache, the mutiny in every house. 

How much pain, how many diseases 
Consigned to the mythological, the dropped 
Ovaries, the torn-up nerves, what women 
Said, what men wanted to believe? Part of it 

Laughable, I know. Still I want someone 
To see, now that they lie safe in graves 
Beyond the vacant stores, that someone 
Listened and, hearing the wrong at the heart, 

Named it something that sounded real, whatever 
They lived through and died of. I remember 
Mrs. Lyle who called it a thorn in the flesh, 
And Mr. Appleton, who had no roof in his mouth. 

undying, blading into air,
impersonal, forced, curving it
revolution and the organs shutting
down but not these extremities,
here since I first opened my first
eyes first day and there they were,
delicate, pointing, will not back off,
cannot be remembered. Mother,
remembering who I am as I run
take away the phone because who
dreamt I have to get this dress on, if
mother who cannot get the dress on
because of broken hip and broken
arm and tubes and coils and pan
and everywhere pain, wandering
delirium, in the fetid shadow-
you have been scribbling all your
life to me, what is this you drag
again today into non-being. Draw it.
The me who is not here. Who is the
ghost in this room. What am I that
is now drawn. Where are we
heading. Into what do you throw
me then down onto the blank of the
page. You rip the face
off. I see my elbow there where
now you bend it with the pen, you
fill it in, you slough it off me onto
more just-now making of more
future. You look back up, you take
my strangeness from me, you
machine me, you hatch me in. To
make what, mother, here in this
eternity this second this million
years where I watch as each thing is
seen and cancelled-out and re-
fingers dipping frantic into the bag
of pens, pencils, then here they
line now, it is our world,
it horizons, we ghost, we sleepwalk,
everything around us is leveled,
canceled, we background, we
are barely remains, we remain, but
for what, the fingers are deepening
curling, bringing it round, the mind
but the fingers, oh, for all my life
scribbling open the unseen,
done with mere things, not
interested in appraisal, just
serious, about direction, tracing
things that dissolve from thingness
from here to here, aggregates,
thicket, this spot could be where
we came in, or where we are saved,
could be a mistake, looks across
room through me, me not here
then, me trying to rise in the beam,
nothing I do will make it
happen, rock-face, work that
excludes everything that is not
itself, all urge in the process of
becoming all effect, how can I touch
that hand like snow moving, when
is it time again as here there is no
time, or time has been loaded but
wound up, I was also made but not
like this, I look for reluctance,
expectation, but those are not the
the paper, cloudy with a sun
wisdom turning itself away from
would gold-up but cannot, a patch
of blue outside suddenly like the
cessation of language when lips
my writing of it, want my hands not
to be here also, mingling with hers
who will not take my hand ever into
hers, no matter how late we are, no
matter that we have to run so fast
through all these people and I need
the hand, somewhere a radiant
clearing, are we heading for it, head
down towards the wide page, hand
full of high feeling, cannot tell if it
takes or gives, cannot tell what it is
that is generating the line, it comes
from the long fingers but is not
them, all is being spent, the feeling
would be spent for this next thing
this capture, actually loud though
all you can hear is the small
scratching, and I feel dusk
approaching though it is still early
afternoon, just slipping,
no one here to see this but me, told
loud in silence by arcs, contours,
the river that goes
nowhere, that has survived the
astonishments and will never
venture close to that heat again, is
cool here, looking up at what,
looking back down, how is it
possible the world still exists, as it
begins to take form there, in the not
being, there is once then there is the
big vocabulary, loosed, like
bird goes away, cold mornings,
hauling dawn away with it, leaving
known what to find in the unmade
undrawn unseen unmarked and
visible.
Mother, I cannot mind my wheel;
      My fingers ache, my lips are dry:
Oh! if you felt the pain I feel!
      But Oh, who ever felt as I!

No longer could I doubt him true;
      All other men may use deceit:
He always said my eyes were blue,
      And often swore my lips were sweet.

She sat on a shelf,
her breasts two bellies
on her poked-out belly,
on which the navel looked
her knees bent and apart,
her long left arm raised,
with the large hand knuckled
her right hand clamping
its round, pale, new,
soft muzzle hunting
in the brown hair for a nipple,
its splayed, tiny hand picking
at her naked, dirty ear.
Twisting its little neck,
with tortured, ecstatic eyes
the size of lentils, it looked
into her severe, close-set,
solemn eyes, that beneath bald
in sockets of leather.

She twitched some chin-hairs,
with pain or pleasure,
as the baby-mouth found and
yanked at her nipple;
its pink-nailed, jointless
fingers, wandering her face,
tangled in the tufts
of her cliffy brows.
She brought her big
hand down from the bar
with pretended exasperation
unfastened the little hand,
while her right hand
with snag-nailed forefinger
and short, sharp thumb, raked
the new orange hair
and found a louse,
which she lipped, and
thoughtfully crisped
between broad teeth.
She wrinkled appreciative
nostrils which, without a nose,
above the poke of her mouth.

She licked her lips, flicked
then, suddenly flung
up both arms and grabbed
the bars overhead.
The baby's scrabbly fingers
in her long, stretched armpits.
And, as she stately swung,
and then proudly, more swiftly
slung herself from corner
arms longer than her round
her little wild-haired,
poke-mouthed infant hung,
like some sort of trophy,
clean, soft and shining
on her chest.

Sleepy and suburban at dusk, 
geometry, edging around the garden  
and the weedy knots of flowers, circling  
trees and shrubs, giving 
a wide berth to the berry patch, 
heavy and sprawled out of its bounds.  
Shoving such a machine 
around a fairway of dandelions, 
it is easy to feel absurd. 
The average lawn, left alone 
one hundred years, could become 
a hardwood forest. An admirable project.  
Still I carry on, following week on week  
the same mowing pattern, cutting edges,  
almost sprinting the last narrow swaths.  
And tonight, as I mow over 
the bushels of fallen peaches, 
seems hardly any different. 
But on one crooked march I walk 
across the thin hidden hole 
to a yellowjacket hive. The blade pulls  
them up from their deep sweet chamber  
just as my bare legs go by. 

A bee lands heavily, 
all blunder and revenge, and the sting  
is a quick embrace and release, 
with the shock and pain of it, 
howling in a sprint toward the house, 
the mower flopped on its side, wild blade loose  
in the darkening air. 
the motor sputtered quiet, starved by tilt,  
a half-dozen stings packed in wet tobacco,  
carrying a can of gasoline, a five-foot torch.  
The destruction is easy: shove can 
slow to entranceway lip, pull 
back and light torch, use torch 
A few flaming drones flutter out and fall.  
Stragglers, late returners, cruise 
wide circles around the ruins. 
In the cool September night they fly 
or die. In the morning I finish my chores. 

All the way to winter the blackened hole  
remains. On Christmas Eve a light  
late snow covers it and all 
hummocks, high maple roots, 
the mushroom-laden fairy ring that defies  
obliteration and appears every spring  
more visible than ever. Standing 
in the window, the scent 
of pine powerful around me, 
the snap of wood undoing itself in the stove,  
I wonder at this thin and cold 
camouflage, falling, 
gradually falling over what has gone  
and grown before. And I hear 
that other rattle and report, that engine 
driven by another fire. I think of a gold  
that is sweet and unguent, a gold  
that is a blaze of years behind me.  
I hear wind in its regular passes  
blowing across the roof, 
feel in my legs a minute and icy tingling, 
as though I have stood too long 
in one place or made again another wrong step,  
as though the present itself  
were a kind of memory, coiled, waiting,  
dying to be seen from tomorrow.

1.

Language must suffice.

Years ago,
stung with stars and swept back by black leaves
barely rustling,

a beautiful woman nearly killed me.

Listen,
she said,
and turned
her lovely face to the stars, the wild sky....

2.

No.

No: years ago,

strung with stars and swept back by black leaves
barely rustling,

under this sky
broad, bright, all rung around

a beautiful woman killed me, nearly.

I say beautiful. You had to see her.

Listen,
she said,

and turned a lovely shell of her ear
to the swirl of stars
and the moon

3.

Yes: she scraped my back bloody against a rough trunk.
Yes: she flung back her lovely face
and her hair, holding me down,

and the tree shook slowly, as in a mild, persistent laugh
or wind,

swung to and fro ...

there were millions of stars
up where she stared past us,
and one moon, I think.

4.

Excuse me.

My friend, who loves poetry truly, says too much
nature taints my work.

Yes. Yes. Yes.
so many wild, bowing limbs
howling or groaning into the natural night ...

and he might be right. Even here.

That is, if tree were a tree.
That is, if star or moon or even beautiful woman
craning the shell of her ear
were what they were.

They are, I think, not.

No: and a poem about nature contains anything but.

5.

When they descended to us, they were a cloud of stars
sweeping lightly. They sang to us urgently
about our lives,

they touched us

and held down by such hungers, we let them cover us,
this beautiful woman, this me,

who were stung again, were covered that quickly, crying
to each other

6.
the exquisite, weeping language
of the wasps, nor her face in starlight
and so tranquil under that false, papery, bobbing
just minutes before,
saying listen,

listen,

nor then the weight
of her whole natural body
until we both cried out for fear, and pain,

7.

Language must suffice.

it does. Listen, listen.

What do you hear? This nearly killed me.
Yes: I will save you ... 
Yes: I love you too much to watch you suffer!

And, anyway, I loved her, she was so beautiful.
And that is what I have had to say
before they have killed you, too,

or before we have all become something else entirely,

which is to say
before we are
only language.
I arise around survival of the event
as worse than the event
The whole place surrounds the smell
I take one step toward and ten paces back
breathless with the mirrors
with the fees and meters
Feces I fax my demon family
weeping on the bridge again

My condition was induced as follows
Releasing actual sales numbers, trying to mount
the policeman or his horse
tonguing captains manually
strong simultaneous tendencies to approach
and avoid appearance and avoidance

Men come to my cherry doors to carry on
about finance and cricket
coaxing a cavernous oath
wrestling natives into nestling

My part is basically to hatch
with regard for human dignity and life
In my best foreign automobile
stunting the stupor fronting us

In order to love my country better
I offer monthly meter readings
I am filled with rhythm, passion and speed
protruding in public
popping my collar into a wreck

My father sits me down
Son, he says, don't let them enter
your mouth I wrote a narrative
about our collective pain
and went shopping

Thorough sharp seas in winter nights doth pass
'Tween rock and rock; and eke mine en'my, alas,
That is my lord, steereth with cruelness;
And every owre a thought in readiness,
As though that death were light in such a case.
An endless wind doth tear the sail apace
Of forced sighs and trusty fearfulness.
A rain of tears, a cloud of dark disdain,
Hath done the weared cords great hinderance;
The stars be hid that led me to this pain;
And I remain despairing of the port.

Three weeks, and now I hear!
What a headstart for the other elegists!
I say, No matter! by any route and manner
we shall arrive beside you together. 
Envy, Triumph, Pride, Derision:
such passionate oarsmen drive my harpooneer,
he hurls himself through your side. 
You lie and wait to be overtaken. 
You absent yourself at every touch.

It was an adolescent, a poetboy,
voice breaking from the ego-distance like 
but one in facsimile, recon-
stituted static, a locust voice,
exhumed, resurrected, chirring
in its seventeenth year, contentedly 

the unique force, the common vacancy, 
the silence and seaward tumultuous gorge 
slowly clogging with your own disjecta, 
tourists, trivia, history,
disciples, picnickers in hell;
oh great Derivative in quest
of your own unknown author, the source, 
a flying bit of the beginning blast, 
sky-shard where early thunder slumbers: 
the first syllabic grunt, a danger, 
a nameless name, a tap on the head; you, 
Olson!, whale, thrasher, bard of bigthink, 
your cargo of ambergris and pain, 
your steamy stupendous sputtering 
precocious larvae have begun to try
the collected works beneath your battered sides.

See them now! dazzling elegists sitting 
on their silvery kites on air
like symbols in flight, swooping daredevils 
jockey for position, mount a hasty breeze 
and come careering at your vastness 
to tread among the gulls and plover 
console us for our gift of speech. 
Embarrassed before the sea and silence, 
we do not rise or sing,
wherefore this choir of eternal boys
strut and sigh and puff their chests and stare 
outward from the foundering beach.

King of the flowering deathboat, falls, 
island, leviathan, starship night,
you plunge to the primitive deep 
its Follies and its Vices, cannot reach, 
and swim among their lost originals 
and re-enter your own first Fool,
inventing happiness out of nothing.
You are the legend death and the sea have seized 
in order to become explicable.

speed and space burn monstrousness 
away, exaltation blooms in the clear: 
fair weather, great bonanza, the high!, 
swelling treasure, blue catch of heaven.
The swimmer like the sea reaches every shore. 
Superlative song levitates from lips 
of the glowing memorialists,
their selves flash upward in the sun.

Now you are heavier than earth, everything 
has become lighter than the air.

I have no illusion
some fusion
will save me,
bewilderment
ungrave me

as when the El
shooting through a hell
where nothing thrives
but soot
that have learned to eat it

a grace of sparks
the fast curve that jostled
and fastened us
I will not call it love

but at least some brief
and no doubt illusionary belief
we were all seeing
one thing:
struck from an iron pain.

Already it was gone.
Already it was bone,
and the encroaching skyline
pecked so clean
I shuddered at the cold gleam

we hurtled toward
like some insentient herd
and Division.
And yet all that day
that's never gone completely away

of immense clear-paned towers
and endlessly expendable hours
teeming human streets,
filled with a shine
and not mine.

1

three years we waited for him, attention riveted,
closely scanning
the pines the shore the stars.
we were searching to find once more the first seed
so that the age-old drama could begin again.

We returned to our homes broken,
limbs incapable, mouths cracked
by the tastes of rust and brine.
when we woke we traveled towards the north, strangers
plunged into mist by the immaculate wings of swans that wounded us.
On winter nights the strong wind from the east maddened us,

We brought back
these carved reliefs of a humble art.

Still one more well inside a cave.
It used to be easy for us to draw up idols and ornaments
to please those friends who still remained loyal to us.

remind us of our past happiness:
the fingers on the rim, as the poet put it.
The fingers feel the coolness of the stone a little,
and the cave stakes its soul and loses it
every moment, full of silence, without a drop of water.

I woke with this marble head in my hands;
It was falling into the dream as I was coming out of the dream
so our life became one and it will be very difficult for it to separate again.

I look at the eyes: neither open nor closed
I speak to the mouth which keeps trying to speak
I hold the cheeks which have broken through the skin.

My hands disappear and come towards me
mutilated.

And a soul
if it is to know itself
must look
into its own soul:

about the work or the thirst or the frost,
they had the bearing of trees and waves
that accept the wind and the rain
accept the night and the sun
without changing in the midst of change.
They were fine, whole days
they sweated at the oars with lowered eyes
breathing in rhythm
and their blood reddened a submissive skin.
Sometimes they sang, with lowered eyes
as we were passing the deserted island with the Barbary figs
to the west, beyond the cape of the dogs
that bark.
If it is to know itself, they said
it must look into its own soul, they said
in the sunset.
We went past many capes many islands the sea
leading to another sea, gulls and seals.
Sometimes disconsolate women wept
lamenting their lost children
and others frantic sought Alexander the Great
and glories buried in the depths of Asia.

We moored on shores full of night-scenes,
the birds singing, with waters that left on the hands
the memory of a great happiness.
But the voyages did not end.
Their souls became one with the oars and the oarlocks
with the solemn face of the prow
with the water that shattered their image.
The companions died one by one,
with lowered eyes. Their oars
mark the place where they sleep on the shore.

No one remembers them. Justice

We saw them perhaps twice and then they took to the ships:
cargoes of coal, cargoes of grain, and our friends
lost beyond the ocean forever.
Dawn finds us beside the tired lamp
drawing on paper, awkwardly, painfully,
ships mermaids or sea shells;
at dusk we go down to the river
because it shows us the way to the sea;
and we spend the nights in cellars that smell of tar.

Our friends have left us
we met them when sleep
still brought us close to the breathing wave
perhaps we search for them because we search for the other life,
beyond the statues.

The garden with its fountains in the rain
you will see only from behind the clouded glass
of the low window. Your room
will be lit only by the flames from the fireplace
and sometimes the distant lightning will reveal
the wrinkles on your forehead, my old Friend.

The garden with the fountains that in your hands
was a rhythm of the other life, beyond the broken
statues and the tragic columns
and a dance among the oleanders
misty glass will have cut it off from your life.
will spring from your memory to strike
this window struck by rain
from the outside world.

Westward the sea merges with a mountain range.
From our left the south wind blows and drives us mad,
the kind of wind that strips bones of their flesh.
Our house among pines and carobs.
Large windows. Large tables
so many months now, dropping them
into the space between us in order to fill it up.

Star of dawn, when you lowered your eyes
our hours were sweeter than oil
on a wound, more joyful than cold water
You held our life in the palm of your hand.
After the bitter bread of exile,
at night if we remain in front of the white wall
your voice approaches us like the hope of fire;
and again this wind hones
a razor against our nerves.

Each of us writes you the same thing
watching, each of us, the same world separately
the light and darkness on the mountain range
and you.
Who will lift this sorrow from our hearts?
Yesterday evening a heavy rain and again today
would build a collapsing tower.

Among these decimated villages
on this promontory, open to the south wind
with the mountain range in front of us hiding you,
who will appraise for us the sentence to oblivion?
Who will accept our offering, at this close of autumn?

THE MIND IS AN ANCIENT AND FAMOUS CAPITAL

The mind is a city like London,
Smoky and populous: it is a capital
Like Rome, ruined and eternal,
Marked by the monuments which no one
Catacombs, aqueducts, amphitheatres, palaces,

Our little lives are ruled by the gods, by Pan,
Piping of all, seeking to grasp or grasping
All of the grapes; and by the bow-and-arrow god,
Cupid, piercing the heart through, suddenly and forever.

Will the houselights of the universe
Light up and blaze?
Which murmurs in a shell,

THE FEAR AND DREAD OF THE MIND OF THE OTHERS

Self-love was unrequited, or betrayed?
The torment of possibility:
As I saw myself, within my gaze, or see
Knowing their certainty that I was only
With himself alone, how could I have
Approximate images, imaginary parallels
Comparisons and mere metaphors: for all
Of them are substitutes, both counterfeit and vague:
They are, at most, deceptive resemblances,
False in their very likeness, like the sons
Who are alike and kin and more unlike and false
And everything, older or younger, nevertheless
A passionate nonesuch who has before has been.
The words for what is my heart do not exist?

...
The river was the dream space where I walked,
A self anew, another self, or self renewed
Strong in hope once more, ever in eagerness
Jumping like joy, would they have heard? How could they?
How, when what they knew was, like the grass,
Gazing upon their faces as they gazed
Holy and deified as priestesses of hope
They were disfigured ducks who might become
And be, and ever beloved, white swans, noble and beautiful.
Giggled and snickered, cruel. Surely have said
This is the puerile mania of the obsessed,
The living logic of the lunatic:
I was the statue of their merriment,
Dead and a death, Pharoah and monster forsaken and lost.

...
Buffoons or clowns in the farce or comedy
When they took pleasure in knowing that they were not like me.

...
I waited like obsession in solitude:
And sang, softly, haunted, unlike the sun
Despair or peace, making me once more
1.
Cross-hatchings, palm and rain,
clapboard faded
to the grain, half-shutters
open to old vines and mangroves

draining their own shadows;
recollecting what the body knows
suspended between coral
and shifting images of cloud ...

After death,
after the knowledge
of death,
his death,

his face, unwrapped,
already yellowed,
papery, recovered
with a small white cloth

then lowered away
and shut to the earth;

So pierced,
so mute,
these words
re-opening:

 Not this.

2.
The rain had gone. I swam against the current,
harnessed by water till I turned and swung
out with the tide, shouldering deep

into a rhythm of my own, long strokes
pulled under the body and returning
past the glinting crease in which I breathed,

the sea half-woken like another body
bedded into sheer transparency,
the outer reaches granular with light.

Comebacks. Chains of radiance.
Far more than meet the eye.

What do they meet then, intimate
but otherworldly, mimicking the world?

pines along the shoreline near a fort

where cannons rust, mouths left open among
thistleweed around the dozing moat.

Far back among fallen needles, pigeons shuffle
through shade, their feathers iris underlight,
soft flares bob the dark.

The land had disappeared.
The sun had followed it. From either wrist,
half-mingled with my breath into the night,

a trail of ungloved phosphor travelled back.

3.
Sounds too have their surfaces:

within
the mortal frame, particles of blood
revolve as in a sort of heaven where

breath moves through us as an unseen light;
but when the marrow bonds are parted they in turn
set loose what has been called the soul ...

the spill and friction
glancing like a coin within a sea of coins;

my left hand pulls through as I breathe,
the right recovers, elbow in the air,

pike-flash in a swerving current,
predatory bird.

that constellation

as each had been, now
gone. Or going on,

4.
A slanting chop.
Erratic gasps
between thick chunks of water

crowded through the night.

The unclogged screw
of a propellor

ringing into fossil-drillings,

(the jangled
monkey-chain above his bed;

he clung with both hands
to the small trapese,
his lower body paralyzed
for months ...

far larger than myself,
a shambling hulk,

tentacular, a pulpy
helmet, lantern eyes,
the huge mouth gorging,

undigested corpses
bulging in the belly wall.
I thrashed to break free

but the ocean held me,
and a slap of water broke
across my mouth.

5.Natal Command
Troughs of recollection; hands now two numb sponges,
and a cold ache pressed into the spine.

A conscript leaning on my rifle, I stood guard for hours
staring through wire toward the Blue Waters Hotel:

an all-night crew, unreal, flourescent
polished the lobby floors; high in a yellow cell

black shadows rippled on drapes until the lights went out.

beyond the esplanade; the ocean shifting
to an onshore drowse of salt over the palm trees and camp.

A palm rat slithers through rotten fronds.
The mind floats imageless.

Then back to footage of commandos stalking a sentry

over the mouth, the blade thrust in, the sagging weight set down,
a clutch to save the helmet as it drops to gravel, quick

hand signals to shadows hunched behind. One night while
still on guard I crept into an empty tent and fell asleep.

He held my rifle. Prodded the bayonet at my spine,

as the bayonet found the nerve, pain jolting

to my hands and feet.His boot beside the blade
he pumped me hard against the ground then let me up,

my limbs still trembling, the uniform stuck bloody to my back.

6.
When does it begin,
the reptile mind among its enemies

driven deep into the bag,

the rifle stock slammed home,
The first thing I did against my will is see light.
I sometimes dreamed different kinds of darkness.
I kicked, had sweet dreams and nightmares
something like death, unborn happiness,
that still push me to act with unborn hands,
all before breathing.

What last thing will cross my mind
after last rights and wrongs?
They say the grand finale is like sleep,
May I never waver in peaceful unmindfulness.
you my love. The end.
A roof over my head, protected from the rain,
Escaping the turbulence of this modern Rome
in a flurry of skyline views and exploding foam,
I can see that 747 in flight over Nova Scotia,
Lahinch and Limerick, snoring back to the future;
I can see the old stormy island from the air,
its meteorological gaiety and despair,
some evidence of light industry and agriculture,
familiar contours, turfsmoke on field and town;
A recovering Ulster Protestant from Co. Down,
I shall walk the Dublin lanes as the days grow shorter,
I who once had poems in The New Yorker,
and spend old age, if any, in an old mac
with the young audibly sneering behind my back,
deafened by seagulls and the playground cries
Now, listening to the rus-in-urbe, spring-in-winter noise
of late-night diners while the temperatures rise
and the terrible wind-chill factor abates, I realize
the daffodils must be out in ditch and glen
and windows soon flung wide to the spring rain;
and marvel how, a figure out of the past,
an old man in a hurry, you stuck it here to the last,
negotiating the icefields of 8th Avenue
a young woman with a sick child she tried to hide
(not out of shame, you felt, but anguished pride),
Thus your epiphany, and you wrote to explain:
Things you understood: children, the human face,
of women and the priority of the real.
Things that puzzled you: economy, fear,
the argument from design, the need to feel secure,
the belief in another world besides this one here.
Despite your rationalism, did it ever appear
and you yourself a showing-forth of that soul?
what glimpse was given to you in the black hole?
that you were at home here and in human nature
but also, in your own words, lived and died

Wait for the chisel of the mind,
Green canyons to the south, immense and passive,
Penetrated rarely, seeded only
Tribes of the shark and the octopus,
The founding fathers with their guns and bibles,
Botanist, whaler, added bones and names
To the land, to us a bridle
As if the id were a horse: the swampy towns
Like dreamers that struggle to wake,
Explores its own pain, hearing
Or fingers of the Tasman pressing
On breasts of hardening sand, as actors
Find their own solitude in mirrors,
As one who has buried his dead,
Able at last to give with an open hand.

A thing as delicious as turning the last sound I heard
into a word it cannot be or calling your hidden wish
out into the broad space of the public to make you touch
me instead of asking that I go naked, a thing as delicious
as any of that would not be as safe as a dumb silence.

I am resting my back with a cushion against the chair,
sitting inside the ache when I soaked myself in a balm
the way women went to the river and held things down
until they were as wet as Jesus hanging in the rain,
his pain the invocation of roars destroying the temple.

The things I know are not the things you wish to know,
or they are and I cannot give them to you until I see
what you think of contracts, of what binds the mornings
to unkind sunlight, what takes a hawk and lets it know
there are things less grand than flying, things that crave.

Waxy stalactites
Drip and thicken, tears

The earthen womb
Black bat airs

Cold homicides.
They weld to me like plums.

Icicles, old echoer.
Even the newts are white,

Those holy Joes.
Christ! they are panes of ice,

Religion, drinking

The candle
Gulps and recovers its small altitude,

Its yellows hearten.
O embryo

The blood blooms clean

The pain
You wake to is not yours.

Love, love,

Let the stars
Plummet to their dark address,

Into the terrible well,

You are the one
You are the baby in the barn.

what sort of question a patient will pose,

or how exactly one should answer.
Outside the window, snow on snow
began to answer the ground below

with nothing more than foolish questions.
We were no different. I asked again:

and laugh for lack of something more
to add. For days he had played that game,
and day after day I avoided your name

by instinct. I never told him how

Call it an act of omission, my love.
Tonight, while walking to the car,
I said your name to the evening star,

clearly pronouncing the syllables
to see your name dissipate
in the air, evaporate.

Only the night air carries your words
up to the dead (the ancients wrote):
I watched them rise, become remote.

Deeper than sleep but not so deep as death
I lay there dreaming and my magic head
remembered and forgot. On first cry I
remembered and forgot and did believe.
I knew love and I knew evil:
woke to the burning song and the tree burning blind,
despair of our days and the calm milk-giver who
renewal of all waters and the time of the stars
and the black snake with gold bones.
Black sleeps, gold burns; on second cry I woke
fully and gave to feed and fed on feeding.
Gold seed, green pain, my wizards in the earth
walked through the house, black in the morning dark.
Shadows grew in my veins, my bright belief,
my head of dreams deeper than night and sleep.
Voices of all black animals crying to drink,
cries of all birth arise, simple as we,
found in the leaves, in clouds and dark, in dream,
deep as this hour, ready again to sleep.

with no inside toilet
and if you become famous or something
your mother
all to yourself and
from one of those
it never gets across how much you
understood their feelings
as the whole family attended meetings about Hollydale
and even though you remember
your biographers never understand
and another dream goes
concerns you
and though they fought a lot
but only that everybody is together and you
Christmases
to write about me
because they never understand
probably talk about my hard childhood
and never understand that
all the while I was quite happy

The ants are licking open the peonies
unwrapping the seal to the tight globes
and chase away a ladybug
is a great sports city the tour
fragrance like stadium food

2

The wind is so high,
the lake surface contracts
in a gasp

The waves jump straight up.

Our side must be winning.

I can't hear
the crowd of whitecap I see
from the bus run

The joggers and cyclists
look as though hysterically
they carry,

There's not another side
what we play

We field against a fog,
or, the home game in solids, ice
in a change of uniform

We contend against what is

We want a side that isn't
ours to have of

like the waves cheering on
this morning this morning

We want our messengers

dead silent
at our feet for us to walk
winning or not: still won a life

that lets us live it
seas of dancing streets in the envelope.

3

When the waves jumped straight up, the messenger
Sand smashed them to pieces for winning

When the surface fainted back, the stampeding
Sky sank its foot in that face to leave winning

There were two countless words for the score
You hear the roar of silence over winning

Someone screaming, What are you doing, what are you

Doing nothing is thrown out the window
To eliminate that way to deal with winning

We burned gridlocked cars in Morse code before
We took off running to say living is winning

Lake Shore Drive reads Chicago is 'living

4

lay afloat in the gondola

the daylit lanterns of their dreams
hide inexpressibly their faces made up
with not being in Kansas

they fan with maps
like feathers of brightly colored directions
to famous brands

of which this street is

as if, since people move, there are no people
on this street; the stalks of the buildings, reeds
a hem of the lake sweeps through.

5

daylight you see people's
reflections off each other fill the street
cascading one from another
the crowd slips like a fan out of itself,

in the angling of store displays
the glass facets kaleidoscope a rose
window back
of themselves full of the flash petals of grace

that fall by evening home,
when the ones dressed in evening

all the want and people scavenged back

6

The street in the opening between buildings
is running a strip of the el like a frame
by frame tape, the windows of the train
different shots of the sky, then it breaks,

and the clouds are caught up in the walls
of nearby glass-skin architecture.
I never get to see what I think
would be the whole movie. I, too, move on.

The turns in the drive roll the buildings
out from behind one another in a scenery
change, only I am the one on wheels,
the drop backs a larger stage than this town.

And just as I can see betrayal coming
by the music, my eyes braille the thunder
hidden even up the sleeve of a silent
film. The hand shakes anyway. Not meant

to be the end of things. An inbound train
toward the loop will be arriving shortly.
The street in the opening

7

the actual oil it looks like it should.
Wildcatters call this a dry hole. But it isn't,
it has the pool of Lake Michigan

on the bottom when you're looking from the top
What an amazing hole, he said. Enchantment's name

pick pockets hadn't sighted yet the eyes,
the bulging wealth of openness, the shiny change.
We were watching the old movie of our century.

into volumes in our pack trying to solve our plot.
A close-up on the winch-rope, frayed
by so continuously raising the question,

the crude that is this day struck from our drilling

8

I heard the eagle flies on Friday as
Not enough for any growth to get paid

its flowers. Mostly weed. Bouquet of distraction.
Broken glass season gives way to plastic
in the lots, only the packaging changes,
it snows something or other year round

white to deal with, powder or rock. Or through
the window, the country unable to stop
opening its poverties, making the sun go 'round
to the back. But the sun reserves its someday

someday to shine where door don' 'llow light.
And I am drenched by a slow, barely brought in
gusher of my working through the cracks,
a gold opened in myself like a vein through

blinding pain, through the names of need and silence.
But my someday come seems didn't

9

Dawn burnished
but the slowest curve

an arm swipes
How like the sky she bends above her child,
One with the great horizon of her pain!
No sob from our low seas where woe runs wild,
No weeping cloud, no momentary rain,
Can mar the heaven-high visage of her grief,
That frozen anguish, proud, majestic, dumb.
She stoops in pity above the labouring earth,
Knowing how fond, how brief
Is all its hope, past, present, and to come,
She stoops in pity, and yearns to assuage its dearth.

Through that fair face the whole dark universe
And all those wrenched Promethean souls that curse
The gods, but cannot die before their hour,
Find utterance in her beauty. That fair head
Men heard in Rama when the twisted ways
Her silence towers to Silences on high;

It is the pity, the pity of human love
That strains her face, upturned to meet the doom,
And her deep bosom, like a snow-white dove
That she must shield till death. Death, death alone
Can break the anguished horror of that spell.
The sorrow on her face
Is sealed: the living flesh is turned to stone;
She knows all, all, that Life and Time can tell.

Braving the thunder, still, still hide the slender
Soft frightened child beneath her mighty heart.
She is all one mute immortal cry, one brief
Infinite pang of such victorious pain
That she transcends the heavens and bows them down!
The majesty of grief
Is hers, and her dominion must remain
Eternal. Grief alone can wear that crown.

the woods. Over the river and into the pain. It is an addict's
talk of quitting as she's smacking at a vein. He was always

He saw the woods and knew. The forest is the one that holds
with a quiet snow. Miles are traveled as we sleep. He steers

lit from above. His little horse thinks it is queer. They go
deeper, sky gets darker. It's the darkest night of the year.

He had no promises to keep, nothing pending. Had no bed
to head to, measurably away in miles. He was a freak like me,
monster of the dawn. Whose woods these are I think I know,
his house is in the village though. In the middle of life

he found himself lost in a dark woods. I discovered myself
in a somber forest. In between my breasts and breaths I got
lost. The woods are lovely, dark and deep. But I've got promises
to keep, smiles to go before I leap. I'm going into the woods.

darkness. No one has asked, let alone taken, a promise of me,
It doesn't matter where I sleep. It doesn't matter where I sleep.

linoleum flecked with flame,
a thick coat of wax that flashed
down a corridor and led to a room,
a place where I curled up a few 
innocuous inches off the floor. 
straps hung in loops on closet hooks. 
On the nightstand a basket with 
peanut butter crackers, a vivid 
and unnatural orange, a crinkly 
wrap. A knee-high fridge stocked 
with icy juices, foil boxes, straws 
glued on. A female voice next door 
claimed she was still a human being, 
though I could not hear the reasons. 
When it was my turn, I answered 
right away, saying I knew where 
I was and why. No, I would not 
harm myself, surprised to be asked 
as I had never had the thought. 
Yes I knew where I was going next. 
Out the window and through shadow 
and streetlight, I saw how this building 
connected to the next. I was to follow 
a stripe painted on the wall. Someone 
would walk with me as well. I felt fine 
I said, and it was sort of true. Actually 
I felt nailed by one wrist to a desire 
to flee and by the other to a sincere 
longing for sleep. I was not in pain. 
Thank you. I felt like the very last note 
in a concert, the one that hovers as if 
Some problems of self-loathing, worry:
the thumbnail blotched in a bank box
door grows out, three-quarter moon marrow spot
filled out with white bruise travels down
my thumb at regular speed, so when I glance
down it's what I see left of center, not
the odd breast, the malformed scruff
at head, the old thought leaking pain
on the pages from my brain, which ought
to be gainfully occupied with rain
as an emblem of loss and gain, and is not.

the blood-smear across the knuckles:
painless, inexplicable.
once you discover it pain will begin,
in miniature.
never will you learn what caused it.
you forget it.

the telephone answered on the twelfth ring:
silence without breath, cunning, stark.
and then he hangs up.
and you stand there, alone.
then you forget.

and your father's inexplicable visit:
two days' notice, a ten-hour reckless drive.
rains, 80 mph winds, bad luck all the way,
traffic backed up, a broken windshield wiper,
and no stopping him.

clumsy handshakes.
he must leave in the morning,
must get back.
a gas station two blocks away repairs the wiper.

did he sense death,
and so he raced to us?
did he already guess at his death
behind those nervous fond smiles,
the tumult of memories he had to bear?

nothing we know can explain his visit,
touching us, squeezing our arms, smiling.
the visit was an excuse.
the words that surrounded our touching were an excuse.
inexplicable, that the language we invent may be a means
to get us closer, to allow us to touch one another,
and then to back away.

And now the silver, ripping sound of white on white, the satin,
light snow torn
under wheels, car bang metally grenading, and the wood poles,
I have always wanted to sing a song of praise
for the unscathed: myself
from gone; slim pole slicing cable
up to sheet metal, seat foam, corduroy
(like butter, the mechanic will later
tell me, poking a stiff finger through the cloth),
to pierce the exact point
I was supposed to sit, stopping
because praise begins where pain
transfigures itself,
stoppered by a deeper kind of joy: so I
transfigure myself from driver
to survivor, the blessed Lazarine failure
bolting up and opening her eyes.
And here are the thousand wrecks
from a life configured in snow before me: myself,
at five, pulled from the burning car seat;
at twelve, bleeding from the scalp
after the car throws me from my bike; at fourteen,
tumbling over the slick hood rushing;
sockets of windows with glass
bashed out into a translucent, toothy ring; lights
and bumpers clipped clean off; tires burst; deer
gravitationally hurled through my windshield; brakes
given out and worse,
the icy loop de loops
All the ways technology should have killed me
Praise for my death-hungry luck!
marriage lost,
buried in the blanks of white space, my solitude
at the Greyhound station
knowing no one to retrieve me,
carless among the other pressed tight
unbearably young mothers,
drifters, boy soldiers
shoulder to shoulder with the insane, weaving
the same thread of conversation back and forth
between ourselves. How
could this happen to me
at this age, at this stage, how
did I not notice, and will you put this seat up?
and will you lend me this quarter? and will you
call me a cab when we get back home?
The young man in the seat before me, head
full of zigzagging tight braids says,
Sure you can dig up that ballot box in Florida
buried in the Everglades, repeats it
for the amusement of the woman across from him,
who knows a presidential failure like she knows herself,
and when we pass my accident on the road points
For this, and for all these things: praise
to the white plains of Wyoming, highway coiled
like a length of rime-colored rope; to snow
broiling in the sunlight so that the landscape
takes on a nuclear glow, so bright
we have to shield our eyes from it. Praise
for myself playing at morbidity
because I thought I had a right to it
as if flesh had to follow spirit
to such a pure depth the bones themselves
could not rest but must be broken, nerves
singed then ripped out, the heart clenched madly in its chest.
As if I had nothing except this white earth, this
smashed car to praise
what I knew before and know
even better now, the hills
cold as a hip bone and tufted with ice. Praise
to my youth and to my age, praise
to ambition and small-mindedness,
the kind I recognize and the kind
I am soon to recognize; praise
to self-hatred for it keeps me alive, and praise
for the splinters of delight that can pierce it.
Praise for wood pole, praise for glass.
Praise for muscle, praise for bone.
And the sun gleams into it as our bus slides by,
the light of us a wash of gold illuminating
bodies lost, bodies regained; gleaming
like my heart here, on this earth,
bloody and still beating.

One morn before me were three figures seen, 
They came again; as when the urn once more 
With vases, to one deep in Phidian lore.

How is it, Shadows! that I knew ye not? 

I knew to be my demon Poesy.

They faded, and, forsooth! I wanted wings: 
And for that poor Ambition! it springs 
Or hear the voice of busy common-sense!

Upon your skirts had fallen no tears of mine.

So, ye three Ghosts, adieu! Ye cannot raise 
For I would not be dieted with praise, 
Farewell! I yet have visions for the night, 
Vanish, ye Phantoms! from my idle spright, 

Gone are the days when my heart was young and gay,
Gone are my friends from the cotton fields away,
Gone from the earth to a better land I know,

Why do I weep when my heart should feel no pain
Why do I sigh that my friends come not again,
Grieving for forms Now departed long a go?

Where are the hearts once so happy and so free?
The children so dear that I held upon my knee,
Gone to the shore where my soul has longed to go.

Or evicted. Soon
They expect to have nothing to eat.
In the meantime, they sit.

A violent pain is coming, they think.
It will start in the heart
And climb into the mouth.

Tonight they watch the window
Without exchanging a word.
It has rained, and now it looks

I see him get up to lower the shades.
If their window stays dark,
I know his hand has reached hers
Just as she was about to turn on the lights.

You plan an uncomplicated path
a single night at a hotel
in the Idaho panhandle. Our plans change.
together and the days open:
sunrise on a fine long road,
antelope against dry hills,
heron emerging from dim fields.
You tell me this is a journey
You ask me to tell you what I want.

I want my longing to miraculously
bring you through the barrier of your skin
into my blood so that I can possess you
entirely and yet be entirely possessed.
You say no, your face tight with pain, tears
burning your eyes, hands clenching the steering wheel.
I believe you. We drive hundreds of miles
across deserts sculpted by wind and story,
and I learn distance from my hand to your thigh,
your mouth to my mouth, the curve of a collar
along a warm, smooth neck.
You grin as if no one has ever seen you thus:
naked, savage, happy.
That is the beginning of yes.

Ghosts are everywhere.
We hear them singing on that mountain in Ute country,
the cries of your flute pleasuring old spirits.
Like those people whose land we cross,
Instead, we mark the waterfall of shy kisses,
a dry windy town where we exchange secrets in whispers,
the high cliff hollow that shelters us
on the edge of the Uinta forest.
Wildflowers bend beneath our bodies,
cup the trembling weight of touch.
We wander for awhile in a place vast enough
to contain all possibilities.

After twelve hundred miles together
we enter green forest thick along a fearless river.
or the arc of the sun to know east from west.
There at last you clasp my hand, guide it
to a place beyond maps,
no universe I have ever known.
It is a raw landscape; we are the sojourners
overcome by the perilous shock of arrival.
We stop the car, walk by the river,
clumsy, frightened by desire. I wish
for more than body or soul can bear.

Sweet, these are the maps we made together,
territories we foolishly vowed to own.
Here, the place we wandered off the map,
moved deep into a land without scars
where every direction took us home
but no place could give us shelter.
broken heart. I fall on my knees, our love
a bare stone on the windowsill between us.
How can I learn this trick, will your body
back to the other side of my skin? Help me
terrible, and alive.

See how the orient dew, 
Yet careless of its mansion new, 
Frames as it can its native element. 
Because so long divided from the sphere. 
And to the skies exhale it back again. 
Does, in its pure and circling thoughts, express 

And contemplate this: the heat-treated hairdos of next-door
your own face, rinsed in the mirror, the sweet green sweat
algaecidal light. You are going nowhere. This poem yokes
you, to the pain you are chronic and adipose with; to the desk,
to the chair, to ergonomic purgatory. And to the body, its
spasms and its rhapsodies, three-part harmonies, one-chord
wonders. You will never be whole. The voices. His voice,
broadcast on your remedial frequency, making its way
through a rubbishy dusk, the streetlamps beaming fizzy glow
and the brain is Kraken, white and shaking. Open the window,
pry the chipboard from the window; fill your punctured eye
with stars. And contemplate this: Saturday night and the dirt
purrs with it; cars, litter bins, pit bull dogs. A girl with high
Yorick cheekbones drags a false nail down the scratchy
surface of a bri-nylon sleeplessness. A man rides ignorance
like a white horse, kicking mirrors from parked cars. You
have the itch under your skin. Insectile dysfunction. Lust,
with its own murky gravities. You will fail. You have not
made a friend of this city and you will fail. Cup your eyes
like coins. Addiction holds such simplicity. Check your
used-car contours in the broken glass. You are going
nowhere. They cannot nail you to a pronoun, hot mess
rancid rainbow. Ugly. Contemplate. Consider: your
lilies, toiling like deaf ears, tearing the tired night a new
one, stirring a sulfate dust in your veins. Your eyes
are blue with pseudo-scientific toxicity, with chemical
expectancy, a dread that dries a smile like paint. Your
blood is on fire, full of bellicose adrenaline, nitrate
and neon; brighter, even, than the hoary fluorescence
of angels. It is so late. And you are pining the rhinestone
Trauma, your ergot, your argot of rye. Awful thought
Pray the dark room away, the candles, the pious vibrations
of flame; the dim bulb with its gospel of moths, one
hundred pairs of gloved hands clasped to powder.
Marooned in your gooseflesh, one hand does not know
like frostbite, a cold burn that blackens things. Your
graphite smile could shatter. Thoughts of him have
poisoned you, rust in the blood. You have not eaten
for days, you mottle, run your own hands over your
oxidizing thighs, watch the bruises ripen to a landmass,
a landmark, a brave new world, a here be dragons.
You listen to yourself, creaking like rope; your body, its
canned laughter repeating mean and low, throwing
out thought according to the malnourished algorithm
again: sleep; his image breaking across your scrubbed
flesh like surf. Contemplate this: this is forever.
to transformation. You will never be whole. And grief
is not a line we walk to wellness; the tidy smirk
of therapy, the therapized, the girls licking flakes of gold-
leaf pastry from a Pret a Manger croissant, saying you
should take up yoga. Grief is a longing in the body, your
so uncool, a super-terrestrial emptiness; the acetone-eroded
teeth of your disorder. He will not come again. Sleep will
not come and make an amnesty of bandages, the white
ribbons rendering you prematurely maypole. It will not
wrap you. It will not keep you. It will not launder or
succor you. It will break into your ballerina box, will
chew the jewels from their semiprecious sockets, set
them pulsing in your frontal lobe. Your heart has

Of godlike hardship tells me I must die
Like a sick eagle looking at the sky.
Such dim-conceived glories of the brain
So do these wonders a most dizzy pain,

By sudden blasts, or slow decline, 

Well tried through many a varying year, 
Officious, innocent, sincere, 

Nor, lettered Arrogance, deny 

When fainting Nature called for aid, 
His vigorous remedy displayed 

Where hopeless Anguish poured his groan, 

No summons mocked by chill delay, 
The modest wants of every day 

His virtues walked their narrow round, 
And sure the Eternal Master found 

The busy day, the peaceful night, 
His frame was firm, his powers were bright, 

Then with no throbbing fiery pain, 
Death broke at once the vital chain, 

id
Two ids walk into one body & fight over whether to break melon on the kitchen counter & eat it by the fistful or to throw the melon out a shut window & watch it break on the pavement, stabbed by shards of glass.
ego
superego
1.
One girl of many. Hungry from her birth
In joyless girlhood working for her bread.
At each small sorrow wishing she were dead,
Yet gay at little pleasures. Sunlight seems
Most bright & warm where it most seldom gleams.

2.
One girl of many. Tawdry dress and old;
And not enough beneath to bar the cold.
The little that she had misspent because
Thinking in ignorance that it was best
To wear a stylish look, and -- bear the rest.

3.
One girl of many. With a human heart.
Of each new pain as keenly as your own.
The old ones, through long use, have softer grown.
And yet in spite of use she holds the thought
Of might-be joys more than, perhaps, she ought.

4.
One girl of many. But the fault is here;
Though she to all the others was so near;
One difference there was, which made a change.
No wrong thing, surely. Consequence most strange!
She, through no evil, was more fair than they.

5.
Where you may drudge and starve till you are old.
Come! I will give you rest. And food. And fire.
Shelter. Protection. Kindness. Peace & Love.

6.
And she had not. In all her daily sight
There shone no vestige of the color White.
She had seen nothing in her narrow life
She knew no reason why the thing was wrong;
And instinct grows debased in ages long.

7.
All things that she had ever yet desired
All that life held of yet unknown delight
Shone, to her ignorance, in colors bright.
Shone near at hand and sure. If she had known!
But she was ignorant. She was alone.

8.
And so she - sinned. I think we call it sin.
And found that every step she took therein
Made sinning easier and conscience weak.
And there was never one who cared to speak
A word to guide and warn her. If there were
I fear such help were thrown away on her.

9.
Only one girl of many. Of the street.
In lowest depths. The story grows unmeet
For wellbred ears. Sorrow and sin and shame
Over and over till the blackened name
Sank out of sight without a hand to save.
Sin, shame, and sorrow. Sickness, & the grave.

10.
Only one girl of many. Tis a need
Social necessity. Men cannot live
Without what these disgraceful creatures give.
Black shame. Dishonor. Misery & Sin.
And men find needed health & life therein.

that I used each evening evening out
what all day spent wrinkling.

I bought a dress that was so extravagantly feminine
you could see my ovaries through it.

This is how I thought I would seduce you.
This is how frantic I hollowed out.

Another way of telling it
is to hire some kind of gnarled

and symbolic troll to make
a tape recording.

Of plastic beads coming unglued

This might be an important sound,
like serotonin or mighty mitochondria,

so your body hears about
how you stole the ring made

from a glittery opiate
and the locket that held candy.

as insidious as it is,

because two sides hold up nothing but each other.

A tentacled skepticism,
a suspended contempt,

such fancies and toxins form a third wall.

A mean way to end
and I never dreamed we meant it.

Another way of putting it is like
slathering jam on a scrape.

Do sweets soothe pain or simply make it stick?
Which is the worst! So much technology

focus on making mudcakes look solid in the rain.

in that it is set in an aquarium and the audience participates

as various fish. The twist comes when it is revealed
that the most personally attractive fish have eyes

only on one side and repel each other like magnets.
The starfish is the size of an eraser and does as much damage.

Starfish, the eponymous and still unlikely hero, has
those five pink moving suckerpads

that allow endless permutations so no solid memory,
no recent history, nothing better, left unsaid.

The story exists even when there are no witnesses,
kissers, tellers. Because secrets secrete,

and these versions tend to be slapstick, as if in a candy
factory the chocolate belted down the conveyor too fast

or everyone turned sideways at the same time by accident.
This little tale tries so hard to be humorous,

wants so badly to win affection and to lodge.
Because nothing is truly forgotten and loved.

So when they levy a critique of an undertaking which,

in their view, overtakes, I take it seriously.
They think one may start a tale off whingy

and wretched in a regular voice.
But when one strikes out whimsically,

as if this story is happening to nobody

The Richards believe you cannot

privately jettison into the sky, just for fun.
You must stack stories from the foundation up.

From the sad heart and the feet tired of supporting it.
Language is architecture, after all, not an air capsule,

not a hang glide. This is real life.

Because no one unbuilds meticulously
and meticulosity is what allows hearing.

Three million Richards make one point.
I hear it in order to make others. Mistake.

As it turns out, there is a wrong way to tell this story.
I was wrong to tell you how muti-true everything is,

when it would be truer to say nothing.

in absolute quiet. In extreme context.

It could have gone so many ways.

This just one of the ways it went.
Tell me another.
I. 
FRIENDS of faces unknown and a land
   Unvisited over the sea,
Who tell me how lonely you stand
With a single gold curl in the hand

II. 
While you ask me to ponder and say
   What a father and mother can do,
With the bright fellow-locks put away
Out of reach, beyond kiss, in the clay
   Where the violets press nearer than you.

III. 
Shall I speak like a poet, or run
   Into weak woman's tears for relief ?
Yet my arm 's round my own little son,
   And Love knows the secret of Grief.

IV. 
And I feel what it must be and is,
   When God draws a new angel so
Through the house of a man up to His,
With a murmur of music, you miss,
   And a rapture of light, you forgo.

V. 
How you think, staring on at the door,
   Where the face of your angel flashed in,
That its brightness, familiar before,
Burns off from you ever the more
   For the dark of your sorrow and sin.

VI. 
God lent him and takes him,' you sigh ;
And the thing which He gives, I deny
   That He ever can take back again.

VII. 
He gives what He gives. I appeal
When the veil of the body we feel
   The motherhood's advent in power,

VIII. 
   By apocalypse (God being there
Full in nature) the child is our own,
Life of life, love of love, moan of moan,
   Through all changes, all times, everywhere.

IX. 
He 's ours and for ever. Believe,
To the first love's assurance. To give
Means with God not to tempt or deceive
   With a cup thrust in Benjamin's sack.

X. 
He gives what He gives. Be content !
God lend ? Where the usurers lent
In His temple, indignant He went
   And scourged away all those impure.

XI. 
He lends not ; but gives to the end,
   As He loves to the end. If it seem
That He draws back a gift, comprehend

XII. 
   Too costly, though given by herself,
Till the room shall be stiller from noise,
And the children more fit for such joys,
   Kept over their heads on the shelf.

XIII. 
So look up, friends ! you, who indeed
   Have possessed in your house a sweet piece
Of the Heaven which men strive for, must need
   Where they loiter, persist where they cease.

XIV. 
You know how one angel smiles there.
   Then weep not. 'Tis easy for you
To be drawn by a single gold hair
Of that curl, from earth's storm and despair,
   To the safe place above us. Adieu.

Only a dad, with a tired face, 
Coming home from the daily race, 
Bringing little of gold or fame, 
To show how well he has played the game, 
But glad in his heart that his own rejoice 
To see him come, and to hear his voice. 

Only a dad, with a brood of four, 
One of ten million men or more. 
Plodding along in the daily strife, 
Bearing the whips and the scorns of life, 
With never a whimper of pain or hate, 
For the sake of those who at home await. 

Only a dad, neither rich nor proud, 
Merely one of the surging crowd
Toiling, striving from day to day, 
Facing whatever may come his way, 
Silent, whenever the harsh condemn, 
And bearing it all for the love of them. 

Only a dad, but he gives his all
To smooth the way for his children small, 
Doing, with courage stern and grim, 
The deeds that his father did for him. 
This is the line that for him I pen, 
Only a dad, but the best of men.

2. Your hair will be white in a single night, 

3. You will enjoy a sweet old age, 

4. You will fall down at eighty-four, 

5. You will finish your days with God for your friend: 

6. You will be ever absorbed in books, 

7. In peace and plenty you will lie, 

8. You will have cause for many tears, 

9. Ah, is it so? when you are old, 

10. In the night-time you will weep, 

11. Nothing dreadful, nothing sad, 

12. You always will have an excellent table, 

14. Your plenty and peace 

15. You will suddenly die in the crowded street, 

16. You will ride in your carriage-and-four, 

17. Never murmur, never care, 

18. Sick at heart, and sick at head, 

19. As the might of God you see, 

20. To California you will go 

21. Brightest pleasures you will see, 

22. Love will gild your joyous life, 

24. To California you will be sent, 

25. A missionary you will be, 

26. It is your destiny to rule, 

27. Ball and parties you will find 

28. Through the vista of the years 

30. Fair in the wild and prairied west, 

33. A great pianist, you will gain 

34. A kitchen garden you will keep, 

35. To higher virtues you will rise, 

37. In digging in a worn-out field 

38. A music teacher you will be, 

39. You will travel in your prime, 

41. The most of your time will be passed on the sea, 

42. On an island will you live, 

43. You will spend your leisure hours, 

as I wait on the turning lane. Cars blur past, 
their headlights white as charcoal. 
I trust each driver not to swerve. I trust each stranger 
not to kill me and let me cross 
the shadow of his smoky path. 
Trust is all I have for patrons at the bar: 
one man offers me a line, one man buys the kamikaze, 
another drinks it. Yet another wraps his arm 
around my waist. I trust him not to harm my body 
as much as he expects his body to remain unharmed. 
One man asks me to the dance floor, one asks me 
to a second drink, another asks me home. 
I dance, I drink, I follow. 
I can trust a man without clothes. 
Naked he conceals no weapons, no threat 
but the blood in his erection. His bed unfamiliar, 
only temporarily. Pillows without loyalty 
absorb the weight of any man, betray 
the scent of the men who came before. 
nothing valuable. It makes no promises 
Undisguised, they do not turn to claws or pretend 
artistic skill to draw configurations on my flesh. They 
are only human hands with fingertips 
unsentimental with discoveries, without nostalgia 
for what they leave behind. I trust this stranger 
not to stay inside me once he enters me. 
I trust him to release me from the blame 
of pleasure. The pain I exit with no greater 
than the loneliness that takes me to the bar. 
He says good night, I give him back 
those words, taking nothing with me that is his. 
The front door shuts behind me, the gravel 
driveway ushers me away. The rearview mirror 
loses sight of threshold, house, sidewalk, street. 
Driving by the nightclub I pass a car 
impatient on the turning lane. My hands are cold 
and itch to swerve the wheel, to brand 
his fender with the fury of my headlights. 
But I let this stranger live 
to struggle through the heat and sweat 
of false affections, anonymous and 
borrowed like the glass that washed my prints 

Pure gaze, you are lightning beyond the last trees
past, branching 
green lightning 
of terminal brain branches 
hunter color, as night comes on, 
the ocean they conceal
gone berserk, wind still rising.
Pure seeing, dual vortex doors 
to the blue fire where
is as it was and I am being offered
in your eyes, as in cupped hands,
the water of to never thirst again.
Again I turn away, 
and the future comes, all at once 
towering around me 
on every side, and I am lost.
Pure looking, past pain 
(this is promised):
delighting, flashing risk, risk
unfailingly lighting the way, 
anything possible 
in that dissolving of seam 
between minds, 
each step I took
the right step, words 
came to me finally and finding the place 
you had set for them,
once again 
wrote themselves down.
solid tap of winged blind cane come,
I wish you 
all the aloneness you hunger for.
That big kitchen table where you sit laughing 
with friends, I see it happening.
And I wish that I could not be 
so much with you
inwardly you might switch 
time, to sleep
and winter while you went about 
your life, until you woke up 
well,
our conversation resumed.
Ceaseless blue lightning, this 
love passing through me: 
I know somehow it will go on
reaching you, reaching you
instantly
when it is no longer deflected 
by all the dark bents, all
so much light pulled off course 
as it passed within reach, so much
lost, lost in me, 
but no more.

I. Riverside Drive, 1929
No. Stagy. Out of character. Oh, hell.
As he retracts his knickerbockered knees
To rise. Outside, a southbound tug receives
The sun broadside, and the bold Linit sign
Pales on the Jersey shore. Fresh gin, tk-tk-
Tk-tk-tk-tk, quite clearly fills his glass
Half full from the unlabelled bottle. Now
Wire basketweave and press the trigger down
To utter soda water. One long sip
Subtracts a third of it for carrying.
On the way back, he pauses at the door
Beside his football picture, where a snore
Attests that all is well and promises
Him time to work. To work: before the tall,
Black, idle typewriter, before the small
Black type elitely inching on the blank
White sea of bond, he quails and takes a drink.
First, demolitions: the slant shilling mark
Defaces half a hundred characters
With killing strike-overs. Now, a new start:
II. Hotel Shawmut, Boston, 1946
Professor S. jumped straight down into hell,
Beneath him, one so cold December day).
While he prepares his body, cold gears mate
And chuckle in the long draught of the street.
He shaves; his silver spectacles peruse
An issue of The North American Muse.
He uses Mum; outside him in the hall,
Maids talk their language; snow begins to fall.
He puts on his old clothes. The narrow room
Has nothing, nothing to discuss with him
Except what time you should send out your suit
And shoes for cleaning. Now he stamps his foot:
Outside the window, not saying anything,
Appears a seagull, standing on one wing;
A long-awaited colleague. With glad cry,
Professor S. embraces the white sky.
While S. demolishes a taxicab,
His spectacles review the life of Crabbe.
Profesor S. descended into hell.
But once in April in New Haven he
III. Deus Ex Machina, Flushing, 1966
La Guardia. Knee-deep in storyboards,
I line up for the shuttle, which arrives
Outside the gate and off-loads shuffling streams
Of sober stuff and nonsense, with a case
Of somber-suited shuttlers carrying
Our cases on. Then one appears, a rare
Bird in migration to New York, a bare-
Crowned singer of the stony coast of Maine,
And of Third Avenue in rain; a bard.
The way of the almost-extinct is hard.
He peers through tortoise-shelly glasses at
The crowd, the place, the year. He is not here
And is. In his check jacket, he describes
An arc of back and arms as he proceeds
Between two city starlings, carrying
His store of songs in a beat leather grip
His wilted collar. A Time-reader in
The bard stalks on on his two legs, aware
At an existence which anticipates
Its end and in the meantime tolerates
Intolerance of the wing, the whim, the one
Unanswerable voice which sings alone.
IV. Lament of the Makers, Including Me: 1967
(A small denomination in
Demotic nickel, brass, or tin)
Passes from hand to hand to hand
Beyond my six acres of land.
Did I desire such currency
Among the meritocracy
Of tri-named ladies who preserve
The flame of art in mackled hands,
Of universitarians
And decimal librarians
Who shore and store up textual
Old arbiters and referees
Who startle letters with a sneeze,
Of critics whose incautious cough
Halts a new wave or sends it off
To break on uninhabited shores,
Of publishers, insensual bores
To Jack the Reader, of well-read
Young underfaced admirers who
Impinge on undefended you
At readings in all colleges?
No, I did not; but knowledge is
All-powerless to seek redress
From injuries to innocence.
I think continually of
Abjurers, who, fed on self-love,
Housed in an incommodious cave,
Clothed in three-button sackcloth, crave
Indulgence of no audience
But their own laudatory ears.
Alack, this anchoritic few
Dwindles; these ticking times are too
And heap past-due advances on
The embryonic artisan;
All hours from dawn to night are lauds,
All auditors are all applause
(However electronic), all
The world turned upside-down, without
A beast in view, without a doubt,
Recalls its exiles and bestows
On them the palm, the bays, the rose
(Art sick?), the Laurel Wormser Prize,
Whose debased dollar only buys
More nods, more goods, more fame, more praise:
Not art, as in the rude old days.
Now worldward poets turn and say,
Timor vitae conturbat me.

Our little boy beneath the sod; 
And brighter burned the Christmas flame, 
And merrier sped the Christmas game, 
The holly hung its ruby balls, 
Woke laughter like a choir of flutes 
As a school let loose to its errant will, 
The jest, the tale, the toast, the glee, 
All took a sober tone; 
Held festival for him alone. 
It scarcely seemed a sin to say 
Not less than for the sacred day. 
Ah! Christ forgive us for the crime 
We owned the error when the mirth 
Of another Christmas lit the hearth 
When, in that lonely burial-ground, 
Removed or shunned, we kept 
Where little Willie slept! 

I might say nothing more, 
The story of that precious life 
Lay other relics from our store 
That throbbed and smiled and wept above 
And in an ordinary home 
Ah! this were jargon on the mart; 
And though some gentle friend, 
But the winged cherub soon to be. 
That wandering hand which seemed to reach 
We held a being less akin 
Than to beings not of clay: 
Must haunt us even in our sleep. 
Is made like spring to bloom; 
And where, at times, we catch the sigh 
As of an angel floating nigh, 
Who longs but has not power to tell 
That in that violet-shrouded cell 
Lies nothing better than the shell 
The tale which is shadowed here: 
To us alone it will always be 
As fresh as our own misery; 
But enough, alas! for the world is said, 

Somewhere now she takes off the dress I am
putting on. It is evening in the antiworld
where she lives. She is forty-five years away
from her death, the hole which spit her out
into pain, impossible at first, later easing,
going, gone. She has unlearned much by now.
Her skin is firming, her memory sharpens,
her hair has grown glossy. She sees without glasses,
she falls in love easily. Her husband has lost his
shuffle, they laugh together. Their money shrinks,
but their ardor increases. Soon her second child
will be young enough to fight its way into her
body and change its life to monkey to frog to
tadpole to cluster of cells to tiny island to
nothing. She is making a list:
She is eager, having heard about adolescent love
and the freedom of children. She wants to read
 Crime and Punishment and ride on a roller coaster
without getting sick. I think of her as she will
be at fifteen, awkward, too serious. In the
mirror I see she uses her left hand to write,
her other to open a jar. By now our lives should
have crossed. Somewhere sometime we must have
passed one another like going and coming trains,
with both of us looking the other way.

The Bergman image of a game
of chess with Death,
though not in a dreamscape
black-and-white as melancholy
films clanking with symbols,
but in a garden in Provence
with goldfish in the fountain
and enormous palms whose topmost
fronds cut into the eternal
blue of sky above the Roman
ruins and the dusty streets
most perfect meal: that is what
I think of when I remember
I have AIDS. But when
I think of how AIDS kills
my friends, especially
the ones whose paths
through life have least
prepared them to resist
the monster, I think of
an insatiable and prowling beast
with razor teeth and a persistent
stink that sticks to every
living branch of flower
its rank fur brushes
as it stalks its prey.
I think of that disgusting
animal eating my beautiful friends,
innocent as baby deer. Dwight:
so delicate and vain, his spindly
arms and legs pinned down with needles,
pain of tubes and needles, his narrow
chest inflated by machine, his mind
lost in the seven-minute gap
and the time the nurses noticed
something wrong. I wrapped
my limbs around that fragile body
for the first time seven years
ago, in a cheap hotel by the piers,
where every bit of his extravagant
pedal pushers in a leopard print,
lay wrapped in a corner of
his room in a yellow parachute.
It's hard enough to find a parachute
in New York City, I remember thinking,
but finding one the right shade
of canary is the accomplishment
of the sort of citizen with whom
I wish to populate my life.
Dwight the dancer, Dwight the fashion
illustrator and the fashion plate,
Dwight the child, the borderline
transvestite, Dwight the frightened,
infuriating me because an anti-AZT
diatribe by some eccentric
in a rag convinced him not to take
the pills with which he might
still be alive, Dwight
on the runway, Dwight on the phone
screwing a girl from Massapequa
(he wore more makeup and had better
jewelry than she did), Dwight planning
the trip to London or Berlin where he
would be discovered and his life
transformed. Dwight erased,
evicted from his own young body.
Dwight dead. At Bellevue, I wrapped
my arms around his second skin
of gauze and scars and tubing,
brushed my hand against
his plats, and said goodbye.
who loosed the devouring animal
that massacred you, gentle boy.
to how you might stave off
the beast. I feel so confident
most days that I can stay
alive, survive and thrive
with AIDS. But when I see
Dwight smile and hear his fey
delighted voice inside my head,
I know AIDS is no chess game
but a hunt, and there is no
way of escaping the bloody
horror of the kill, no way
to bail out, no bright
parachute beside my bed.

It would have been a fine path for a lizard to cross
but I saw none. Brambles and sweet briar grew
on the town side, poppies and wild grasses on the river.
Too hot for birds, the ducks were out, in water and mud,
and frogs were out, by the hundreds it seemed, saying, 
Way, Way, in their deepest voices. It was beautiful there
that when warmth broke over my skin I remembered winter,
When she turned two, I asked my young friend
what she would serve at her birthday party and she said,
Tofu and cupcakes. When she was three and I was very sad
she called and said, What are you doing? Picking flowers?
She talked in poems like she was dreaming all the time
or very old or Virginia Woolf. More often in the first world 
one wakes from not to the nightmare. When I dreamed I lost 
my love I willed myself awake because I would not
survive the pain again, even dreaming. Which is responsible
for that mercy, Doktor, the conscious or the un-? I want
the poppies picked and I want the poppies left where they grow.
Like looking through the window of a moving train 
at someone walking up a road lined with poplars 
and being someone walking up a road lined with poplars. 
The train and the trees, a shower of petals and bees, 
sun on the glass and the train perpendicular to the road. 
Things entirely themselves arriving in the deep 
double shadows of the grass and passersby.

I 

In the cubbyhole entrance to Cornell and Son,  
a woman in a turquoise sweater 
curls up to sleep. Her right arm seeks 
a cold spot in the stone to release its worry  
and her legs stretch 
against the middle hinge. 

I want to ask her in for coffee, 
to tell her go sleep in the extra bed upstairs,  
unaccustomed to this place 
where homeless people drift along the square  
bordering Benjamin Franklin Parkway. 

From her portrait on the mantel, 
Lucretia Mott asks when 
will Americans see 
how all forms of oppression blight 
the possibilities of a people. 
The passion for preserving Independence Square 

should reach this nameless woman, settling  
in the heavy heat of August, 
exposed to the glare of every passerby. 
What makes property so private? A fence? 
No trespassing signs? Militia ready to die for it  
and taxes? Lights in the middle storeys 

of office buildings blaze all night above me.  
is bound to these broken people. 
North of here, things get really rough.  
Longshoremen out of work bet on eddies  
in the Schuylkill River. 

Factories collapse to weed 
and ruptured dream. Years ago, Longhouse sachems  
rode canoes to Philadelphia, 
entering these red brick halls. 
They explained how 
the law that kept them unified 

required a way to share the wealth.  
Inside the hearths of these same halls,  
such knowledge was obscured, 
and plans were laid to push all Indians , 
west. This city born of brotherly love  
still turns around this conflict. 

Deeper in the dusk, 
William Penn must weep 
from his perch on top of City Hall. 
Our leaders left this woman in the lurch.  
How can there be democracy 
without the means to live? 

II 

Every fifteen minutes 
a patrol car cruises by. I jolt awake  
at four a.m. to sirens screeching 
and choppers lugging to the hospital heliport 
someone who wants to breathe. 
The sultry heat leads me 
to the window. What matters? This small  
square of night sky and two trees 
bound by a wide brick wall. 
All around, skyscrapers 

are telling their stories 
under dwindling stars. The girders 
remember where Mohawk ironworkers stayed  
that day they sat after work 
on a balcony, drinking beer. 

Below them, a film crew caught 
some commercials. In another room above  
a mattress caught fire and someone flung it  
down into the frame. A woman in blue  
sashayed up the street 

while a flaming mattress, 
falling at the same speed as a flower,  
bloomed over her left shoulder. 
Every fifteen minutes 
a patrol car cruises by. The men inside 

mean business. They understood the scene.  
A mattress burning in the street 
and business deadlocked. Mohawks 
drinking beer above it all. 
They radioed insurrection, 

drew their guns, then three-stepped 
up the stairs. Film crews caught the scene,  
but it never played. The Mohawks 
When policemen blasted off their door, 

the terrified men shoved a table 
against the splintered frame. 
They fought it out. 
One whose name meant Deer got shot  
again and again. They let him lie 

before they dragged him by his heels  
down four flights of stairs. At every step,  
he hurdled above his pain 
until one final leap 
gained him the stars. 

The news reported one cop broke his leg.  
no plaques. But girders whisper at night 
in Philadelphia. They know the boarding house,  
but will not say. They know as well what lasts 

III 

Passing Doric colonnades of banks 
and walls of dark glass, 
passing press-the-button-visitors-please 
Liberty Townhouses, I turned 
up Broad Street near the Hershey Hotel 
and headed toward the doorman 
outside the Bellevue. Palms and chandeliers inside. 
A woman in mauve silk and pearls stepped into the street. 

I was tracking my Mohawk grandmother  
through time. She left a trace 
of her belief somewhere near Locust and Thirteenth.  

with three bouquets of flowers in your hand. 
On Walnut and Broad, between the Union League  
and the Indian Campsite, you stopped me,  
shoving flowers toward my arm. 

The desperation in your voice 
spiraled through my feet while I fumbled the few bucks  

because in desperation 
you thought of beauty. I recognized 
the truth and human love you acted on, 

your despair echoing my own. 
Forgive me. I should have bought more  
of those Philadelphia flowers, passed hand 
to hand so quickly, I was stunned a block away. 

You had to keep your pride, as I have done,  
selling these bouquets of poems 

I returned for days, but you were never there.  
with a bun of black hair and the gaze of an orphan,  
leave a petal in my path. 

IV 

Some days you get angry enough  
with a multitude of charts and diagrams. 

They planned to take the timber, the good soil.  
Even now, they demolish mountains.  

bare of life. They plan to dump their toxic  
wastes on our grandchildren. No one wants to say 

Lying in dug-outs, joking idly, wearily;
 Hearing the great shells go high over us, eerily
 With pity and pride, photographs of all colours,
 Or mother's faces worn with countless dolours;
 Though in a picture only, a common cheap
 (But he's so shy!). And some with bright looks, calling
 That not the dread of barrage suddenly falling
 Smiles and triumphant careless laughter. O
 Lying in dug-outs, hearing the great shells slow
 Showed me, his eyes wet, his low talk broken,

Pity the bathtub that belongs to the queen its feet
A sign of fretting is that an inferior stone shows through
Where the marble is worn away with industrious
Polishing the tub does not take long it is tiny some say
Because the queen does not want room for splashing
The maid thinks otherwise she knows the king
Does not grip the queen nightly in his arms there are
Others the queen does not have lovers she obeys
Her mother once told her your ancestry is your only
Support then is what she gets in the bathtub she floats
Never holds her nose and goes under not because
She might sink but because she knows to keep her ears
Above water she smiles at the circle of courtiers below
Her feet are kicking against walls which cannot give
Satisfaction at best is to manage to stay clean

2.
Pity the bathtub its forced embrace of the whims of
One man loves but is not loved in return by the object
Of his affection there is little to tell of his profession
There is more for it is because he works with glass
That he thinks things are clear (he loves) and adjustable
(she does not love) he knows how to take something
Small and hard and hot and make room for
His breath quickens at night as he dreams of her he wants
To create a present unlike any other and because he cannot
Hold her he designs something that can a bathtub of
Glass shimmers red when it is hot he pours it into the mold
In a rush of passion only as it begins to cool does it reflect
His foolishness enrages him he throws off his clothes meaning
To jump in and lie there but it is still too hot and his feet propel
Him forward he runs from one end to the other then falls
To the floor blisters begin to swell on his soft feet he watches
His pain harden into a pretty pattern on the bottom of the bath

3.
Pity the bathtub its forced embrace of the human
Form may define external appearance but there is room
For improvement within try a soap dish that allows for
Slippage is inevitable as is difference in the size of
The subject may hoard his or her bubbles at different
Ends of the bathtub may grasp the sponge tightly or
Loosely it may be assumed that eventually everyone gets in
The bath has a place in our lives and our place is
Within it we have control of how much hot how much cold
What to pour in how long we want to stay when to
Return is inevitable because we need something
To define ourselves against even if we know that
Whenever we want we can pull the plug and get out
Which is not the case with our own tighter confinement
Inside the body oh pity the bathtub but pity us too

No, dams the eyes. See how they overflow?
No damns them, damns them, and so they cry.
What shape can I swallow to make me whole?
That fits in the bird-hole of the painted wood box?
The skeleton leaf? The skeleton key? Loud
When the monitor clicks on and off, sound
Of sea-ice cracking against the jagged sea-rocks,
Laughing gull in the gale. What is it dives down
Past sight, down there dark with the other blocks?
This kind curse. Forgive me. Blessing that hurts.

They are bodies of the selfless or of those newly
dead. What appears transparent is really flame
burning so brightly it appears like glass. What
thing in life needed desperately, given to another,
or perhaps life itself. The most beautiful bodies
are not transparent, but sometimes the color
of lead, like the elephant whom a child with some
peanuts lifts by the trunk in his hand in the swirling
dust, so that it appears he has lifted a monument
or a city with all its pain. The bodies that seem
transparent are made of an ice so pure it appears
to be glass sweating, where you, desiring another,
glimpse your own face that weighs nothing and is burning.

or happiness
like candles lighting the entire soft lace
of the air
around the full length of your hair/a shower
organized by God
in brown and auburn
undulations luminous like particles
of flame
But now I do
retrieve an afternoon of apricots
and water interspersed with cigarettes
and sand and rocks
we walked across:
my hand
beside the low tide
of the world
Now I do
relive an evening of retreat
a bridge I left behind
where all the solid heat
of lust and tender trembling
lay as cruel and as kind
as passion spins its infinite
tergiversations in between the bitter
and the sweet
Alone and longing for you
now I do

What will we do
when there is nobody left
to kill?

40,000 gallons of oil gushing into
the ocean
But I
sit on top this mountainside above
the Pacific
checking out the flowers
the California poppies orange
as I meet myself in heat

40,000 gallons gushing up poison
from the deepest seabeds
every hour

40,000 gallons
while
experts international
while
new pollutants
swallow the unfathomable
still:

past the pinks the poppies and the precipice
that let me see the wide Pacific
unsuspecting
even trivial
by virtue of its vast surrender

I am a woman searching for her savagery

Where are the Indians?

Crow Nose
Little Bear
Slim Girl
Black Elk
Fox Belly

the people of the sacred trees
and rivers precious to the stars that told
old stories to the night

how do we follow after you?

falling
snow before the firelight
and buffalo as brothers
to the man

how do we follow into that?

They found her facedown
where she would be dancing
to the shadow drums that humble
birds to silent
They found her body held
its life dispelled
by ice
my life burns to destroy

Anna Mae Pictou Aquash
slain on The Trail of Broken Treaties
bullet lodged in her brain/hands
and fingertips dismembered

who won the only peace
that cannot pass
from mouth to mouth

Memory should agitate
the pierced bone crack
of one in pushed-back horror
pushed-back pain
as when I call out looking for my face
among the wounded coins
to toss about
or out
entirely
the legends of Geronimo
of Pocahontas
now become a squat
pedestrian cement inside the tomb
of all my trust

as when I feel you isolate
among the hungers of the trees
a trembling
hidden tinder so long unsolicited
by flame

as when I accept my sister dead
when there should be
a fluid holiness
of spirits wrapped around the world
redeemed by women
whispering communion

I find my way by following your spine

Your heart indivisible from my real wish
we
compelled the moon into the evening when
I will not let go

Now I am diving for a tide to take me everywhere

Below
the soft Pacific spoils
a purple girdling of the globe
impregnable

Last year the South African Minister of Justice
described Anti-Government Disturbances as
Part of a Worldwide Trend toward the
Breakdown of Established Political and Cultural
Orders

if there is a river
more beautiful than this
bright as the blood
there is a river
more faithful than this
returning each month
is a river
braver than this
coming and coming in a surge
a river
more ancient than this
daughter of eve
there is some where water
more powerful than this wild
water
pray that it flows also
through animals
beautiful and faithful and ancient
and female and brave

How long and thin
she seems today
a field of mustard
smiling up at the sun
it draws her eyebrows
together in a little pain
saw calligraphy of geese
like this overseas
oaks and pines
pretending to be asleep
not quite dark yet
as it is at home
poor people, midnight

This is a year of poppies: our land
was brimming with them as May burned
a sweet dark wine that made me drunk.

From clouds of mulberry to grains to grasses
ripeness was all, in the fitting 
heat, in the slow drowsiness spreading 
through the universe of green. 

My life half over I saw grown sons
setting off alone and vanishing from sight
beyond the prison the flight
of the swallow makes in the spent

glow of a stormy evening, but the pain
gave way humanely to the light
coming on inside the house for another meal
in air made cooler by hail 

letting off steam in the distance. 

in aquarium tanks: grim toys for hooks to ply
free from the rubble. Here, each one gets a tag,
a mount, a photograph to suggest a life,
fields of faces sunken with decay, eyes
jellied in their sockets, heel meats bruised,
a lack of names as, scrubbed of self and skin,
by time and pain to one crisis, never
to be separated. Lost as men, they become event.
in this, they achieve a terrible transcendence.

in from the rain to fight over the morning paper,
limning my deft and emotional promiscuities?
watching the shaggy junipers twirl in winter wind
as a storm closes its throat around the city?
where the last, solitary patient waited inside its unlocked tower
three years in the belief she could not step outside.
And how the local doctors visited only
to re-wrap her face, to brush out her last gold strands
of hair, wondering how to save anybody
so willing to kill herself with denial.
They wanted to talk about pain, the doctors, to say,
play in another room, and feel yourself
suddenly filling like a jug with the cold
awareness nothing more will ever happen, the disaster
of your old ambivalence, the familiarity
The doctors said, Fear should never be elevated
to ritual. They told the woman, You must change your life!
the way this tale is turning out: two aged strangers learning
to tuck in their blood, hiding the knives and bread crumbs
deep inside their pockets. Look, this time I swear,
without a mirror, all my extremities taped in white.
into the deepening silences, to be nice to your step-sisters,
singing to drown out the tears of their ugliness.
I love you. Can I even say that? In this story,
I want to spend the rest of my life growing quietly bored with you,
locking away loom and spindle, sweeping out the piles
of rose petals and ash. For once, I plan to triumph
Please, just come in from the stars awhile, sit here
in this sitting room, let me find you another section of the paper
to argue over. The doctors said I get to wear a suit.
even now, the junipers are whispering their dark good-byes,
thin limbs smocked in white. A riderless horse has appeared
on the horizon. And somewhere, out in the meretricious night,

When men are old, and their friends die,
They are not so sad,
Because their love is running slow,
And cannot spring from the wound with so sharp a pain;
And they are happy with many memories,
And only a little while to be alone.
But we are young, and our friends are dead
Suddenly, and our quick love is torn in two;
So our memories are only hopes that came to nothing.
We are left alone like old men; we should be dead
But there are years and years in which we will still be young.

I want a god
as my accomplice
who spends nights
in houses
of ill repute
and gets up late
on Saturdays

a god
who whistles
through the streets
and trembles
before the lips
of his lover

a god
who waits in line
at the entrance
of movie houses
and likes to drink

a god
who spits
blood from
tuberculosis and
enough for bus fare

a god
knocked
unconscious
by the billy club
of a policeman
at a demonstration

a god
out of fear
before the flaring
electrodes
of torture

a god
who hurts
to the last
bone and
bites the air
in pain

a jobless god
a striking god
a hungry god
a fugitive god
an exiled god
an enraged god

a god
who longs
from jail
for a change
in the order
of things

I want a
more godlike
god

The "I" is the miracle of the "You."

1

female part on fanny pack) at four
Who knew Manhattan streets would liquefy
and lurch with dames sans bras, sans hair, sans shirt
in step with beer-can band led by a skirt-
ed trans in green brassiere, led by the cops
whose sentries are staid as posts with glasses on,
lined up beside the march like S/M tops?
Booze-stymied by the glare of girls and sky,
how could I choose? Should I grip hand, or pray
wondering: Is today today the day

the kind of day she talks but feels no lust.

is humid and the theater is packed.
An ear-cuffed thespian tries to fix the cold,
our leading ladies sweat it out in back.
A prim man to my right begins to sneeze.
My nose is in agreement. The perfume
from Queen Mother there could clear the room.
This shadow play across her face is fine.
I chuckle at an apt sardonic line.
Her suede complexion, lifts up, checks the time.

does this waiter who may think it strange
when young girls dine with staid dames twice their age
on salade de Bastille and pain de Sade.
to the bachelor bunch who want a thrill.
both measuring the humid air for signs
of sparks I see by parts will not ignite.
that cleared the joint than watch another guy
a tit, not spend hip humping hairy thighs.
then give my own hands covert exercise
and send her home to bed without a kiss.

30 for the play and 10 for gins,
10 for two cabs and 40 for the eats,
at least the metro home was freezer-cold,
at least the Broadway Local still had seats
at 96th, the local went express.
I blistered home ten sockless humid blocks
I got this poem for my 90 bucks.

From failure to make the right thing do
Save us, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu.
From genteel angels and apostles unappalled
From Hollywood visions as virgins shawled
From pace without cadence, from pleasures slip-shod
From eating the pease and rejecting the pod
Wolfgang keep us, lover of God.
Steady this flesh toward your made precision.
From pretending to own what we secretly seek,
From (untimely, discourteous) the turned other cheek,
Protect our honor, Demetrius the Greek.
That zeal for free will get us in deep,
That the chance to choose be the one we keep
That free will repeal in us our last pretense
That free will heal us
Strike deep, divide us from cheap-got doubt;
Leap, leap between us and the easy out;
Teach us to seize, to use, to sleep well, to let go;
Let our loves, freed in us, gaudy and graceful, grow.
  Originally appeared in the June 1957 issue of Poetry magazine. 
 Originally appeared in the June 1957 issue of Poetry magazine. 
To sing of Wars, of Captains, and of Kings, 
Of Cities founded, Common-wealths begun, 
For my mean Pen are too superior things; 
Or how they all, or each their dates have run, 
Let Poets and Historians set these forth. 
My obscure lines shall not so dim their worth. 

Fool, I do grudge the Muses did not part 
A Bartas can do what a Bartas will 
But simple I according to my skill. 

Nor yet a sweet Consort from broken strings, 
My foolish, broken, blemished Muse so sings, 
And this to mend, alas, no Art is able, 

Nor can I, like that fluent sweet-tongued Greek 
By Art he gladly found what he did seek, 
A full requital of his striving pain. 
A weak or wounded brain admits no cure. 

I am obnoxious to each carping tongue 
Who says my hand a needle better fits. 
For such despite they cast on female wits. 

But sure the antique Greeks were far more mild, 
But this weak knot they will full soon untie. 
The Greeks did nought but play the fools and lie. 

Let Greeks be Greeks, and Women what they are. 
Men have precedency and still excel; 
It is but vain unjustly to wage war. 
Men can do best, and Women know it well. 
Preeminence in all and each is yours; 
Yet grant some small acknowledgement of ours. 

And oh ye high flown quills that soar the skies, 
And ever with your prey still catch your praise, 
Give thyme or Parsley wreath, I ask no Bays. 
This mean and unrefined ore of mine 

I wanted first to end up as a drunk in the gutter 

and then as an alternative to vodka, to live

alone like a hermit philosopher and court

and then there were the years in which

I needed very badly to take refuge in mediocrity,
 years like blunt scissors cutting out careful squares,

you could say that always my life

my life like scraps stitched together in a dream

in which animals and people, 
plants, chimeras, stars,

a dream forgotten because it has to be forgotten,
but that I looked for desperately, but only sporadically

found in fragments, a hand lifted to strike

and in memory too, some specific pain, sensation of cold or warmth.

I loved that harmony in all its stages of passion,

the voices still talking inside me . . . but then, instead of harmony, 
there was nothing but rags scattered on the ground.

And maybe that's all it means to be a poet.

For you are like their parent 

For you are like a child 

For age after age 

For they remember you 

For they hold you blameless 

For your identical twin 

For they love Silence 
and they forget 

and how those ashes 

Father in their dreams 

and not Silence 

how would anyone know 

and the midwives 

Why are you here?
Who have you come for
and what would you gain?
Where is your fear?

Why are you here?

or so it would seem;
you can see the grain

But why are you here

when you could be elsewhere,
earning a living
or actually learning?
Why should we care

Is that a tear?
and there are peers.

But why are you here?

At times it sears.
The pressure and shame
and the echoing pain.
What do you hear

It calls for equipment,
which comes at a price.

Why? Are you here?

What will you wear?
What will you do
How will you fare?

Why are you here

when it could take years
and may not cohere.

Is it what you revere?

How deep does that go?
How do you know?

Do you have a good ear?
For praise or for verse?
Can you handle a curse?
Define persevere.

Why are you here?

It could be a career.

To celebrate his final Pride, in June,
my friend, lymphatic, thin, and in distress,
managed to dress in drag. He shot the moon:
about the Prada pumps, their skin a snake;
the heavy pantyhose, two pair; the moot
but lacy underthings; the makeup, cake,
to overlay his pain. I called him beaut-
 i-ful; he said he felt like Greta Garbo
in Queen Christina (our campy interplay);
I countered that he looked more like a hobo-
we never left his Castro flat. His rhinestone
glittered, and everywhere, the smell of cologne.

Against all
Solid testimony machines 
Have feelings
Too

Brush past it lightly
With a fine regard
For allowing its molecules 
To remain 100% intact

Machines can think like Wittgenstein 
Thinking softly to itself 
Of the Midnight Flower 
As her tawny parts unfold

In slow motion the boat 
Rocks on the ocean
As her tawny parts unfold

The radio does something mental 
To itself singingly
As her tawny parts unfold
Inside its wires
And steal away its heart

Two minutes after eleven
The color dream communicates itself 
The ink falls on the paper as if magically 
The scalp falls away
A pain is felt
Deep in the radio

I take out my larynx and put it on the blue chair 
And do my dance for the radio
And while remaining motionless elsewise
Force my eyeballs to come as close together as possible 
While uttering a horrible and foreign word
Which I cannot repeat to you without now removing my larynx
And placing it on the blue chair

The radio is thinking a few licks of its own 
Beautiful spas of seltzery coition
Plucked notes like sandpaper attacked by Woody Woodpecker

The radio says Edwardian farmers from Minnesota march on the Mafia
Armed with millions of radioactive poker chips

The radio fears foul play
It turns impersonal
A piggy bank was smashed 
A victim was found naked 
Radio how can you tell me this 
In such a chipper tone
Your structure of voices is a friend 
The best kind
The kind one can turn on or off 
Whenever one wants to
But that is wrong I know
For you will intensely to continue 
And in a deeper way
You do

Hours go by
And I watch you
As you diligently apply
A series of audible frequencies
To tiny receptors
Located inside my cranium
Resulting in much pleasure for someone
Who looks like me
Although he is seated about two inches to my left 
And the both of us
Are listening to your every word
With a weird misapprehension
And Harmon Killebrew is up
With a man aboard

He blasts a game-winning home run
The 559th of his career
But no one cares
Because the broadcast is studio-monitored for taping 
To be replayed in 212 years

Heaven must be like this, radio 
To not care about anything

Heaven must be like this
For as her tawny parts unfold 
The small lights swim roseate
As if of sepals were the tarp made
As it is invisibly unrolled
And sundown gasps its old Ray Charles 45 of Georgia  
Only through your voice

Rain, midnight rain, nothing but the wild rain 
On this bleak hut, and solitude, and me 
Remembering again that I shall die 
And neither hear the rain nor give it thanks 
For washing me cleaner than I have been 
Since I was born into solitude. 
Blessed are the dead that the rain rains upon: 
But here I pray that none whom once I loved 
Is dying tonight or lying still awake 
Solitary, listening to the rain, 
Either in pain or thus in sympathy 
Helpless among the living and the dead, 
Like a cold water among broken reeds, 
Myriads of broken reeds all still and stiff, 
Like me who have no love which this wild rain 
Has not dissolved except the love of death, 
If love it be towards what is perfect and 
Cannot, the tempest tells me, disappoint. 

Clouds spout upon her
   Their waters amain
Her who but lately
   Had shivered with pain 
As at touch of dishonour
If there had lit on her
So coldly, so straightly
   Such arrows of rain:

One who to shelter
   Her delicate head
Would quicken and quicken
   Each tentative tread
If drops chanced to pelt her
   That summertime spills
   In dust-paven rills
When thunder-clouds thicken
   And birds close their bills.

Would that I lay there
   And she were housed here!
Or better, together
Were folded away there
Exposed to one weather
When sunny the day there, 
   Or evening was clear
   At the prime of the year.

Soon will be growing
   Green blades from her mound,
And daisies be showing
   Like stars on the ground,
Loved beyond measure

If I ever get over the bodies of women, I am going to think of the rain, 
of waiting under the eaves of an old house 
at that moment 
when it takes a form like fog. 
It makes the mountain vanish. 
Then the smell of rain, which is the smell of the earth a plow turns up, 
only condensed and refined. 
Almost fifty years since thunder rolled 
and the nerves woke like secret agents under the skin. 
Brazil is where I wanted to live. 
The border is not far from here. 
Lonely and grateful would be my way to end, 
and something for the pain please, 
a little purity to sand the rough edges, 
a slow downpour from the Dark Ages, 
a drizzle from the Pleistocene. 
I will eliminate from mind all the qualities that rain deletes 
the first drops lightly hallowing, 
but now and again a great gallop of the horse of rain 
or an explosion of orange-green light. 
A simple radiance, it requires no discipline. 
Before I knew women, I knew the lonely pleasures of rain. 
The mist and then the clearing. 
I will listen where the lightning thrills the rooster up a willow, 
and my whole life flowing 
until I have no choice, only the rain, 
and I step into it.

he said, grabbing a fifth  
with his right hand, 
the wind with his left. 

I raced Jack Daniels. 
He cheated, told jokes.  

It took a long time 
to reach this Yellow River.  

or is it thirty-one? 
Figured all my years 
carried the same hard thaw.  
Out here, houselights hid 

deep inside the trees. 
For awhile I believed this road  
cut across to Spring Creek  
and I was trucking home. 

I could kid you now,  
say I ran it clean, 
gasping on one lung,  
loaded by a knapsack 

of distrust and hesitation.  
I never got the tone 
in all the talk of cure. 
I sang Honor Songs, crawled 

the railroad bridge to Canada.  
Dizzy from the ties, 
I hung between both worlds.  
Clans of blackbirds circled 

the nearby maple trees. 
The dark heart of me said 
no days more than these. 
As sundown kindled the sumacs, 

I had no need for heat, 
no need to feel ashamed.  
Inside me then the sound 

of burning leaves. Tell them 
I tumbled through a gap on the horizon.  
No, say I stumbled through a hummock  
and fell in a pit of stars. 

When rain weakened my stride,  
I heard them singing 
in a burl of white ash, 
took a few more days to rave 

at them in this wood. 
Then their appaloosas nickered  
in the dawn and they came  
riding down a close ravine. 

Though the bottle was empty,  
I still hung on. Foxtails beat  
the grimace from my brow  
until I took off my pain 

like a pair of old boots. 
I became a hollow horn filled  
with rain, reflecting everything.  
The wind in my hand 

burned cold as hoarfrost 
when my grandfather nudged me  
and called out 

The first person in recorded history
struck by a comet slept on her couch
across the road from the Comet Drive-In
and the comet found her roof, her sadness, her knee,
and woke her. Everything that hurts
hurt before, she said. Showing at the drive-in, a documentary
on tightrope-walking: a young man frustrated
that his dream, the World Trade Center, was not yet built
so he practiced for years in a meadow crossing intended sky, intent
like a pillowcase sweetening him, no harm . . . Here
let the towers go, let them write his crossing, cursive, back and forth
his name steadying our tongues . . . Famous, overcoat
floating down without him, the idea that we stand
where we mean to stand, 1974, a distraction
The poems I was writing were no longer poems of their divorce,
and instead an imaginary family arrived in borrowed gardens,
I wrote poem after poem holding this imagined horror close.

With swift
Great sweep of her
Magnificent arm my pain
Clanged back the doors that shut my soul
From life.

soon, industry and agriculture converged 
sowed the dirtclod truck farms green  

mowed the hay, fed the swine and mutton  

cleared the blue oak and the chaparral 

back-filled the marshes 

removed the unsavory foliage of quag 
made it produce, pistoned and oiled 

abattoirs, walk-in refrigerators, canneries, mills 

though what it meant was a kind of nose-thumbing  
knowing that a refined listener understands the doubleness 

and the leveling of the land, enduing it in sameness, cured malaria 
as the standing water in low glades disappeared, 
typhoid and yellow fever decreased 
thanks to the rise of the feeding pen 

now,  

we carry our uninhabited mortal frames back to the land 
enriched with sewer sludge and urea 

human in its ability to litter inside a cage 

meanwhile, where have I put the notebook on which I was scribbling 

it began like: 

Razors pain you;
Rivers are damp;
Acids stain you;
And drugs cause cramp.
Nooses give;
Gas smells awful;
You might as well live.

RUN AWAY from this sub-
scriber for the second time
are TWO NEGROES, viz. SMART,
an outlandish dark fellow

with his country marks
on his temples and bearing
the remarkable brand of my
name on his left breast, last

seen wearing an old ragged
negro cloth shirt and breeches
made of fearnought; also DIDO,
a likely young wench of a yellow

cast, born in cherrytime in this
parish, wearing a mixed coloured
coat with a bundle of clothes,
mostly blue, under her one good

arm. Both speak tolerable plain
English and may insist on being
called Cuffee and Khasa respect-
ively. Whoever shall deliver

the said goods to the gaoler
in Baton Rouge, or to the Sugar
House in the parish, shall receive
all reasonable charges plus

a genteel reward besides what
the law allows. In the mean
time all persons are strictly
forbid harbouring them, on pain

of being prosecuted to the utmost
rigour of the law. Ten guineas
will be paid to anyone who can
give intelligence of their being

harboured, employed, or enter-
tained by a white person upon
his sentence; five on conviction
of a black. All Masters of vessels

are warned against carrying them
out of state, as they may claim
to be free. If any of the above
Negroes return of their own

accord, they may still be for-
given by

Son:
A son is a steadfast 
keeper of secrets,
a cupped palm, a calyx,
I was born after armistice,
the fissured cities,
but slept nights
with a human smoke.
And though I never shuddered
from a black rouge
of rationed coffee
to keep clean,
the frost and sullen mud
of a forced march,
the unspoken, the unspeakable,
became my life:
I was a boy bathed in dreams
by a menorah fashioned against
the penalty of death,
a mysterious klezmer.
A son is a spirit box, imagine.
Son:
As a boy, my old-world aunts and uncles
would weep when I entered the room:
What did I have to do with sadness?
Their cryptic tears
and purse-tucked Kleenex
were my own tantalizing
Hardy Boys case to crack.
Gradually, as a junior detective, I grasped
how much I resembled
an uncle lost in the war,
and like the savvy, querying boy
at the Passover Seder
become a scrupulous man,
an inquisitive reporter,
What my father marshaled against,
what my mother endured,
the unspoken, the unspeakable,
became my mission:
though I was born in a venomless
time and suburb,
phantoms, chimeras breathed
in our never-quite-here-and-now house,
secret calendars of fire:
Mother, I dreamed we were
riders on the back of silence,
the wild unsaid beneath us:
horse, whale,
behemoth.
We never spoke of the war.
So with stark reading,
a well-thumbed
Diary of Anne Frank,
I resolved to imagine
pitiless showers,
whips and watchtowers
of brute commanders,
their Gypsy-less, Jew-less,
jerry-rigged heaven.
Son:
In my search for your cloud-wrapped past,
Mother,
the wounded earth became mine,
and each time I aligned myself
with the exiled, the dispossessed,
I aligned myself with you.
Apprenticed to, obsessed with,
light and justice,
a girl, with war as her spur,
with hunger as her horse
Mother, in El Salvador
to capture the unearthed
bodies of silenced nuns:
inured to death:
a child in a jacket of flies;
the last typed lines of a friend,
a dissident poet whose body
In the Secret Annex, in the countless
an Esperanto of blood and hope
and forbearance,
as if someday I might receive my wish:
to read, on a night as serene as truce,
your long-awaited story:
I should know it by heart, Mother.
Mother:
rather than fragrance,
April-upon-April hope
braided with arrests and betrayals,
as dark as the derided
spaces in our censored mail.
Garrisons, watchtowers,
checkpoints as daunting as Gorgons,
proliferated.
Long after the white of truce,
in restless sleep I struggled
to awaken the family dead,
to confess, unabashed:
Lampshades of sullied flesh,
I was not prepared
Son:
Soft as a fontanel,
Dove was the pet name
you gave me as a boy,
like a drop of holy water,
its bolstering sweetness
became my talisman.
Palaces of drift and crystal, the clouds
loosen their burden, unworldly flakes so thick
the border zones of sea and shore, the boundless zones
congregate, fleet histories yearning into shape.

some lucent amphora, Venetian blue, lip circled
in faded gold. Can you see the whorls of breath,
imperfections, the navel where it was blown

up from the bay where flakes hiss the instant

snowed into pure wave, the bay beyond and its lavish

floods, the Mississippi drowning whole cities
unfamiliar. How could any form be a vessel
adequate to such becoming, the stories unspooled
through the skein of months as the virus erased

storm clouds, the sudden glowing ladders they let fall?
every flood story I carried. Drifting worlds,
and Wai Min takes a shape I tell Wally as

Chinatown, South Pacific flashing its crimson,
behind black shades, and that voice unraveling past

blends with that halting monotone, scarlet watermarks,
become water, swept away. Three days floating on a door,
his sister, the grandmother weaving stories endless

stories to soothe the children wrapped in the curtain
How rats swam to their raft, soaked cats, spirits
she said, ghosts held tranced by the storied murmurous

when voices unbodied, drift over water past
the low dune this cottage nestles in becoming
shape in motion stilled. No boundaries on this point,
foghorn singing its come-home incantation over

just a little while, our fleet streaked moments?
As this day is given, singular, chilly
bolts of snow chenilled across the sky, the sea.

How to cipher where one life begins and becomes
afloat, gentle sleeper, sweet fish, dancer over
that great four-poster bed he could not leave

for months, a raft to buoy his furious radiant soul,
if I may hazard to say that? Yes,
so many months, banks of sunflowers he loved spitting

their seeds. Tick. Black numerals on the sill.
A world can be built anywhere & he spun, letting go. . . .
The last time I held him, the last time we spoke, just

to be the storm governed by the law of bounty given

fullness, the elaborate collapse, and withdrawal
beyond the drawn curtain that shows the secret

mechanical stark aria that ripples

Nothing for days, then a message:
so I bring a fight to you.
You know nothing of these men;
even the most famous
for you Foreman is Leviathan, unstoppable;
Ali just past his prime
your feet in woollen stockings
kneadable across my thighs,
your mouth close to my ribs
and their inmate: a pouting lifer.
I fidget and you scold.
As Ali opens up with right-hand leads
you flinch
where he waits it out along the ropes,
takes everything Foreman throws.
all this pain and go on standing;
we cheer him on,
winter softened in the tropic of his strength.
When Ali comes alive to put Foreman on the ground
I see a hallelujah look as you turn to face me.

Why do roses need their thorns?  
Some things are little known.  
But thorns of roses  
spring and seize the surface  
before the roses come.  
hunkered down on green, wiry canes,  
smoothed blades of whipping rose stalks,  
and curl their polished tridents  
They are like stars  
digging into firmament  
with such desire, 
and so healthy that  
they almost have to wound,  
borrowed, tamed.  
The touch of a thorn  
is a wry, deep telling  
of the senses not to bloom 
without a wish to,  
to hold us true.

(Stone-coloured light sharpening the roofs below)

Lozenge of love! Medallion of art!
O wolves of memory! Immensements! No,

One shivers slightly, looking up there.
Far-reaching singleness of that wide stare

But is for others undiminished somewhere.

Dear! of all happy in the hour, most blest 
Assured in the dark tides of the world that rest, 
We have found safety with all things undying, 
The deep night, and birds singing, and clouds flying, 
War knows no power. Safe shall be my going, 
And if these poor limbs die, safest of all.

Love the drill, confound the dentist.
Love the fever that carries me home.
Meat of exile. Salt of grief.
This much, indifferent

affliction might yield. But how
and grace must be said in company?
If hatred were honey, as even

the psalmist persuaded himself,
then Agatha might be holding
her breasts on the plate for reproach.
The plate is decidedly

not, at this remove? Her gown
would be stiff with embroidery whatever
the shape of the body beneath.

his face. So the wounded
are given these gowns to wear
and duties that teach them the leverage

of pain. Agatha listens with special
regard to the barren, the dry,
to those with tumors where milk
should be, to those who nurse

for hire. Let me swell,
let me not swell. Remember the child,
how its fingers go blind as it sucks.
Bartholomew, flayed, intervenes

for the tanners. Catherine for millers,
whose wheels are of stone. Sebastian
protects the arrowsmiths, and John
the chandlers, because he was boiled

in oil. We borrow our light

the saints can stay,

The wreck  
is a fact.  
The worst  
has happened.  
The salvage trucks  
back in and  
the salvage men  
begin to sort  
and stack,  
whistling as  
they work.  
Thanks be  
for extractable elements  
which are not  
carriers of pain,  
for this periodic  
table at which  
the self-taught  
salvagers disassemble  
the unthinkable  
to the unthought.

Yes, you could say that. Knocked around together for years. But I am curious . . . what is it got you so bent on knowing Joplin's story?
Took a chunk out of you, huh?
Well, then. Let me pour us a toast . . . Tell me. What story you want to hear? What you need to know?
And clean again.
The mice come in,
The kitchen blown with cold.

I keep the house, and say no words.

It is true I am as twisted as the cactus
I light the stove.

The gas curls round the iron fretwork. the flame
Floats above the lace,
And bounces like a dancer stayed on air.
And catches on my breath;
Coiling, spinning, the blue foam of the gas fire
Turns up its face, like her.

She came to me in rain.
After she left to bed her children down,
Roaring, and singeing nothing.
She had not dared.
I only took her coat, and smiled to hear
In the theater, how she was sopping cold

In the neighborhood. She came to my gas fire
Folded in a doze, a clear, cold curve of stone.

I only leaned above the hair,
I sent her home.
She floated, a blue blossom, over the street.

And when she came again,
It was not long before she turned to me,
Let her hair fall.
And when she came again,
It did not rain.

Leaves the whole bough broken,
The orchard torn with many footprints,
The fence swung wide
On a raw hinge.

And now it is said of me
Or because I have fathered none;
That I twisted the twig in my hands
And cut the blossom free too soon from the seed;
That I lay across the fire,
And snuffed it dead sooner than draft or rain.

They cannot tear the garden out of me,

That searing flower; I will burn in it.
I will not banish love to empty rain.

For their sweet sake
Who sow the world with child.
With their sly voices.

There is a fire that burns beyond the names
Agony sears the dark flesh of the body,
Above the earth, above the sacrifice;
Blossom of gas fire dancing in mid-air:

I am locked in a little cedar box
with a picture of shepherds pasted onto
the central panel between carvings.
The box stands on curved legs.
It has a gold, heart-shaped lock
and no key. I am trying to write my
way out of the closed box
redolent of cedar. Satan
comes to me in the locked box
Say your mother is a pimp.
My mother is a pimp. Something
opens and breaks when I say that.
My spine uncurls in the cedar box
like the pink back of the ballerina pin
with a ruby eye, resting beside me on
satin in the cedar box.
Satan says, down my ear.
The pain of the locked past buzzes
the terrible round pond eye
etched around with roses, where
self-loathing gazed at sorrow.
Something opens. Satan says
Light seems to break on the delicate
edelweiss pin, carved in two
colors of wood. I love him too,
you know, I say to Satan dark
in the locked box. I love them but
in the lost past. Of course, he says
and smiles, of course. Now say: torture. 
I see, through blackness soaked in cedar,
the edge of a large hinge open.
The angle of the hinge widens
until I see the outlines of
the time before I was, when they were
locked in the bed. When I say
Satan softly says, Come out.
But the air around the opening
is heavy and thick as hot smoke.
Come in, he says, and I feel his voice
breathing from the opening.
already, and the huge hinge
begins to close. Oh no, I loved
them, too, I brace
my body tight
in the cedar house.
Satan sucks himself out the keyhole.
the heart-shaped lock with the wax of his tongue.
I hardly hear;
I am warming my cold
the fire, the suddenly discovered knowledge of love.

And here it comes: around the world,
In Chicago, Petersburg, Tokyo, the dancers
Hit the floor running (the communal dancefloor

Here, there, at intervals, sometimes paved,
Sometimes rotted linoleum awash in beer,
Sometimes a field across which the dancers streak

Like violets across grass, sometimes packed dirt
In a township of corrugated metal roofs)
And what was once prescribed ritual, the profuse

Strains of premeditated art, is now improvisation,
The desperately new, where to the sine-curved
Yelps and spasms of police sirens outside

The club, a spasmodic feedback ululates
The death and cremation of history,
Until a boy whose hair is purple spikes,

And a girl wearing a skull
Get up and dance together, sort of, age thirteen.

Of shootouts, of tortured ones in basements,

Between enemies, the jubilance of the criminal.
The girl tosses her head and dances

For a pair of stockings, a scarf, a perfume,
The boy dances stealing the truck,
Shooting his father.

The point is to become a flying viper,
A diving vulva, the great point
Is experiment, like pollen flinging itself

Into far other habitats, or seed

The creatures gamble on the whirl of life
And every adolescent body hot
Enough to sweat it out on the dance floor

Is a laboratory: maybe this lipstick, these boots,
These jeans, these earrings, maybe if I flip
My hair and vibrate my pelvis

At the intersection of poverty and plague

To make, you first have

rustic as a ballpoint pen will go. 

faucet, a Pabst-crack opening

Or do we let him take for him-

myth; destruction, narrative.

Crash on crash of the sea,
straining to wreck men; sea-boards, continents,
raging against the world, furious,
stay at last, for against your fury
and your mad fight,
the line of heroes stands, godlike:

Akroneos, Oknolos, Elatreus,
helm-of-boat, loosener-of-helm, dweller-by-sea,
Nauteus, sea-man,
Prumneos, stern-of-ship,
Agchilalos, sea-girt,
Elatreus, oar-shaft:
lover-of-the-sea, lover-of-the-sea-ebb,
lover-of-the-swift-sea,
Anabesneos, who breaks to anger
as a wave to froth:
Amphiolos, one caught between 
wave-shock and wave-shock:
Eurualos, board sea-wrack,
and Naubolidos, best in shape,
of all first in size:
Laodamos, Halios, and god-like Clytomeos.

Of all nations, of all cities,
of all continents,
she is favoured above the rest,
for she gives men as great as the sea,
to battle against the elements and evil:
greater even than the sea,
they live beyond wrack and death of cities,
and each god-like name spoken
is as a shrine in a godless place.

But to name you,
we, reverent, are breathless,
weak with pain and old loss,
our hearts break but to speak
and may we but call you in the feverish wrack
of our storm-strewn beach, Eretmeos,
our hurt is quiet and our hearts tamed,
as the sea may yet be tamed,
and we vow to float great ships,
named for each hero,
and oar-blades, cut of mountain-trees
as such men might have shaped:
Eretmeos, and the sea is swept,
baffled by the lordly shape,
to love, to mate the sea?
Ah there is Ponteos,
the very deep roar,
they clamour to Ponteos,
leap, swift to kiss, to curl, to creep,
lover to mistress.

What wave, what love, what foam,
Ah stay, my heart, the weight
of lovers, of loneliness
drowns me,
alas that their very names
so press to break my heart
with heart-sick weariness,
what would they be,
the very gods,
rearing their mighty length
beside the unharvested sea?

Did you sneeze? 
Yes, I rid myself of the imposter inside me. 

Did you iron your shirt? 
Yes, I used the steam of mother's hate. 

Did you wash your hands? 
Yes, I learned my hygiene from a raccoon. 

I prayed on my knees, and my knees answered with pain. 
I gargled. I polished my shoes until I saw who I was. 

I walked to my interview, early, 
The sun like a ring on an electric stove. 
I patted my hair when I entered the wind of a revolving door. 
The guard said, For a guy like you, it's the 19th floor. 

The economy was up. Flags whipped in every city plaza 
In America. This I saw for myself as I rode the elevator, 
Empty because everyone had a job but me. 

Did you clean your ears? 
Yes, I heard my fate in the drinking fountain's idiotic drivel.

Did you slice a banana into your daily mush? 
I added a pinch of salt, two raisins to sweeten my breath. 

Did you remember your pen? 
I remembered my fingers when the elevator opened. 

I shook hands that dripped like a dirty sea. 
I found a chair and desk. My name tag said my name. 
Through the glass ceiling, I saw the heavy rumps of CEOs. 
Outside my window, the sun was a burning stove, 
All of us pushing papers 
To keep it going.

What need you, being come to sense, 
But fumble in a greasy till 
And add the halfpence to the pence 
And prayer to shivering prayer, until 
You have dried the marrow from the bone; 
For men were born to pray and save: 

Yet they were of a different kind, 
The names that stilled your childish play, 
They have gone about the world like wind, 
But little time had they to pray 
And what, God help us, could they save? 

Was it for this the wild geese spread 
The grey wing upon every tide; 
For this that all that blood was shed, 
For this Edward Fitzgerald died, 
And Robert Emmet and Wolfe Tone, 
All that delirium of the brave? 

Yet could we turn the years again, 
And call those exiles as they were
 In all their loneliness and pain, 
They weighed so lightly what they gave. 

The shoe repairman works behind the married shoes,
everything cozy in the glass displays, laces paired
propped up, the wooden tongues of shoe horns, poised
to serve the inanimate world ... He comes out mildly
attentive, soft accent, possibly a Scottish
childhood, possibly sheep to tend ... Clear day,
first summer divorced in Berkeley, a time of seamless, indescribable grief; he waits kindly in his blue apron,
fingering the well-worn inner sole, and I am grateful
for those who serve us knowing nothing of our lives ...

*

The cleaner waits behind the silver bell;
on the counter. He greets me with pleasant chatter,
searches through the coats, some left for years,
he says; they make a soft blue whistle as they circulate
on the ovals like the ones under those automatic boats.
As the clothes pass, little checks and prints under
passing by quickly not bothering to greet me. Odd now,

*

I watch the young butcher flipping over the young
chicken: he takes one wing and sort of spins it,
first on its back, flinging the trimmed, watery
lemon-colored fat into the trash, then before
he starts on the legs he puts his hand so deeply in
that the finger comes out the neck ... The other butcher
sets the slab of beef under the saw: the riveting
intricate swirl as the dead flesh pulls away;
ticking, then the carcass swings and swings ...
Somehow I thought we would know everything
through the flesh. Perhaps. But my days have become
spirit. The young butcher splits the chicken
down the back, seems to enjoy the crack of the knife
as it enters the bone, so I try to. Housewives lean
against the cool glass to convey holiday news and he
responds without really looking up; I love that.

*

what? past the French Hotel, the glint of tiny spoons
so briefly and soberly allowed to rest on white saucers,
like me, hearty and hesitant, not wanting to write it,
not wanting to ruin the perfection of the poem
by writing it . . . At the dentist, the little mirror,
the dinosaur prong is put into the mouth. Mouth:
the first darkness. Nearby: the mobile with straw
eyeless fishes. The dentist will go home to her family,
having briefly reached inside the visible mystery
and found nothing ... I imagine Wisdom in the text
is like this, creating the cosmos from the mind of God,
looking interested and competent; she touches
the physical place with her prong, and the pain shines ...

Oh dear! I better

Shattered glass in the street at Maryland and 10th:
smashed sand glittering on a beach of black asphalt.

You can think of it so: or as bits of broken kaleidoscope,
or as crystals spilled from the white throat of a geode.

You can use metaphor to move the glass as far as possible
from the raised hands that threw the bottle

for their own reasons of amusement, or despair, or the desire
to make a cymbal crash in the ears of midnight sleepers.

Or you can use words like your needle, the probe curious
in tough heels, your bare feet having walked in risky places.

You can work to the surface the irritant, pain, the glass
sliver to blink in the light, sharp as a question.

Skimming lightly, wheeling still, 
Over the field in clouded days, 
Over the field where April rain 
Solaced the parched ones stretched in pain 
Through the pause of night 
That followed the Sunday fight 
The church so lone, the log-built one, 
That echoed to many a parting groan 
(What like a bullet can undeceive!) 
While over them the swallows skim, 

The strings, as if they knew
the lovers are about to meet, begin
to soar, and when he marches in the door
while children who have grown up with one stare
steal further looks across a crowded room,
as goners tend to do.

My father loved it too,
long before the final trio came
(Ja, ja, she sighed, and gave him up forever);
he found his Sophie better late than never
and took the fifth about his silent tears
gift for feeling blue.

I went with others, threw
bouquets and caution to the whirling wind,
believing that the rhapsody on stage
would waft its wonders up to our cheap seats;
but mirrors can be beautiful fierce cheats,
delusions of an over-smitten mind;
I relished trouser roles until I had
no petals left to strew.

Up, down the avenue
I wandered like a ghost, I wondered why
a miracle is always a mirage,
then plodded home and set back all the clocks,
spent hard-won funds installing strong new locks,
telling myself if violence like this
could never sound like violins, I would
to art, not life, be true.

And I am trying to
fathom the way I got from there to here,
to watch it on your satin couch downtown
bearing in my trembling ungloved hand
a silver rose for you.

1. The Ministry of Fear

In important places. The lonely scarp
For six years, overlooked your Bogside.
In September 1951
Of stealth.
In vacation time to slim volumes
Vowels and ideas bandied free
I tried to write about the sycamores
And innovated a South Derry rhyme
Lawns of elocution.
Remember that stuff? Inferiority
Went epileptic in the Big Study,
Its echoes plashing over our bowed heads,
Was not so bad, shying as usual.

In the kissing seat of an Austin 16
The car like black cattle, snuffing and pointing
They once read my letters at a roadblock

2. A Constable Calls

Skirting the front mudguard,
Its fat black handlegrips

The pedal treads hanging relieved
Of the boot of the law.

His cap was upside down
On the floor, next his chair.
In his slightly sweating hair.

He had unstrapped
Was making tillage returns
In acres, roods, and perches.

Arithmetic and fear.
Looped into the revolver butt.

Of turnips where the seed ran out

In the potato field? I assumed
Small guilts and sat
He stood up, shifted the baton-case

Farther round on his belt,
Closed the domesday book,
And looked at me as he said goodbye.

And the bicycle ticked, ticked, ticked.

3. Orange Drums, Tyrone, 1966

The lambeg balloons at his belly, weighs
Him back on his haunches, lodging thunder
He is raised up by what he buckles under.

Each arm extended by a seasoned rod,
It is the drums preside, like giant tumours.

The air is pounding like a stethoscope.

4. Summer 1969

Firing into the Falls, I was suffering
Only the bullying sun of Madrid.
Each afternoon, in the casserole heat
Rose like the reek off a flax-dam.
At night on the balcony, gules of wine,
A sense of children in their dark corners,
The air a canyon rivering in Spanish.
Gleamed like fish-bellies in flax-poisoned waters.

Another conjured Lorca from his hill.
On the television, celebrities
Arrived from where the real thing still happened.

Rake of the fusillade. In the next room,
Over the world. Also, that holmgang
He painted with his fists and elbows, flourished
The stained cape of his heart as history charged.

5. Fosterage

Avenue, Belfast, 1962,
A Saturday afternoon, glad to meet
Do your own work. Remember
But to hell with overstating it:
Obeisant to their pain. He discerned
The lineaments of patience everywhere
Imposing on my tongue like obols.

6. Exposure

Alders dripping, birches
The ash tree cold to look at.

A comet that was lost
Those million tons of light
Like a glimmer of haws and rose-hips,

If I could come on meteorite!
Husks, the spent flukes of autumn,

Imagining a hero
Whirled for the desperate.

How did I end up like this?
Beautiful prismatic counselling
And the anvil brains of some who hate me

As I sit weighing and weighing
My responsible tristia.
For what is said behind-backs?

Its low conducive voices
And yet each drop recalls

The diamond absolutes.
And thoughtful; a wood-kerne

Every wind that blows;

Who, blowing up these sparks

Someone has left us now 
before we have even touched hands. 

Getting lost in the pity of it 
sweeps you into an unknown stretch 
of canyon where oars thud 
against rock and rip free, you clutch 
at help, and even though  
you save yourself, the river  
funnels through the gorge  
and roars, roars, roars. 
Regret, a backwash of pain,  
one lost life swirls down rapids,  
rushes away, out of reach. 

it would be easy to drop 
one shoulder and dive, to come up  
gasping in a car on the way to work  
or blue in the face over the dishpan  
staring for who knows how long 
at a cup scoured clean under the suds.  
And not remembering. 

But the absence that is born 
must live as long as a man or a woman.  
There: it comes invisible headfirst, 
a bloodstreaked nothing, and is flushed away.  
While in the white room the dry light  
is cold; and waiting to be taken home  
mute ghosts lie in a row of empty cribs. 

Translated from the French
I love you, great new Titan! 
 Am I not you? 
 Napoleon and Caesar 
 Out of you grew. 
 Out of unthinkable torture, 
 Eyes kissed by death, 
 Won back to the world again, 
 Lost and won in a breath, 
 Cruel men are made immortal. 
 Out of your pain born, 
 They have stolen the sun's power 
 With their feet on your shoulders worn. 
 Let them shrink from your girth, 
 That has outgrown the pallid days 
 When you slept like Circe's swine 
 Or a word in the brain's ways.

Laugh, and the world laughs with you;
Weep, and you weep alone;
For the sad old earth must borrow its mirth,
But has trouble enough of its own.
Sing, and the hills will answer;
Sigh, it is lost on the air;
The echoes bound to a joyful sound,
But shrink from voicing care.

Rejoice, and men will seek you;
Grieve, and they turn and go;
They want full measure of all your pleasure,
But they do not need your woe.
Be glad, and your friends are many;
There are none to decline your nectared wine,

Feast, and your halls are crowded;
Fast, and the world goes by.
Succeed and give, and it helps you live,
But no man can help you die.
There is room in the halls of pleasure
For a large and lordly train,
But one by one we must all file on
Through the narrow aisles of pain.

Up
from Msippi I grew.
(Bare walk and cane stalk
make a hungry belly talk.)
Up
from the river of death.
(Walk bare and stalk cane
make a hungry belly talk.)

Up
from Msippi I grew.
Up
from the river of pain.

Out of the long red earth dipping, rising,
spreading out in deltas and plains,

out of the strong black earth turning
over by the iron plough,

out of the swamp green earth dripping
with moss and snakes,

out of the loins of the leveed lands
muscling its American vein:
the great Father of Waters,
I grew
up,
beside the prickly boll of white,
beside the bone-filled Mississippi
rolling on and on,
breaking over,
cutting off,
ignoring my bleeding fingers.

Bare stalk and sun walk
I hear a boll-weevil talk
cause I grew
up
beside the ox and the bow,
beside the rock church and the shack row,
beside the fox and the crow,
beside the melons and maize,
beside the hound dog,
beside the pink hog,
flea-hunting,
mud-grunting,
cat-fishing,
in the Mississippi
rolling on and on,
ignoring the colored coat I spun
of cotton fibers.

Cane-sweat river-boat

Up from Msippi
I grew,
wailing a song with every strain.

Woman gone woe man too
baby cry rent-pause daddy flew.

I shall not go with pain
Whether you hold me, whether you forget
My little loss and my immortal gain.
O flower unseen, O fountain sealed apart!
Give me one look, one look remembering yet,
Sweet heart.

I shall not go with grief,
Whether you call me, whether you deny
The crowning vintage and the golden sheaf.
O, April hopes that blossom but to close!
Give me one look, one look and so good-bye,
Red rose.

I shall not go with sighs,
But as full-crowned the warrior leaves the fight,
Dawn on his shield and death upon his eyes.
O, life so bitter-sweet and heaven so far!
Give me one look, one look and so good night,
My star.

1 
I celebrate myself, and sing myself, 
And what I assume you shall assume, 
For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you. 

I loafe and invite my soul, 
I lean and loafe at my ease observing a spear of summer grass. 

Born here of parents born here from parents the same, and their parents the same, 
I, now thirty-seven years old in perfect health begin, 
Hoping to cease not till death. 

Creeds and schools in abeyance, 
Retiring back a while sufficed at what they are, but never forgotten, 
I harbor for good or bad, I permit to speak at every hazard, 
Nature without check with original energy. 

2 
Houses and rooms are full of perfumes, the shelves are crowded with perfumes, 
I breathe the fragrance myself and know it and like it, 
The distillation would intoxicate me also, but I shall not let it. 

The atmosphere is not a perfume, it has no taste of the distillation, it is odorless, 
It is for my mouth forever, I am in love with it, 
I will go to the bank by the wood and become undisguised and naked, 
I am mad for it to be in contact with me. 

The smoke of my own breath, 
My respiration and inspiration, the beating of my heart, the passing of blood and air through my lungs, 
A few light kisses, a few embraces, a reaching around of arms, 
The play of shine and shade on the trees as the supple boughs wag, 
The delight alone or in the rush of the streets, or along the fields and hill-sides, 
The feeling of health, the full-noon trill, the song of me rising from bed and meeting the sun. 

Have you felt so proud to get at the meaning of poems? 

Stop this day and night with me and you shall possess the origin of all poems, 
You shall possess the good of the earth and sun, (there are millions of suns left,) 
You shall no longer take things at second or third hand, nor look through the eyes of the dead, nor feed on the spectres in books, 
You shall not look through my eyes either, nor take things from me, 
You shall listen to all sides and filter them from your self. 

3 
I have heard what the talkers were talking, the talk of the beginning and the end, 
But I do not talk of the beginning or the end. 

There was never any more inception than there is now, 
Nor any more youth or age than there is now, 
And will never be any more perfection than there is now, 
Nor any more heaven or hell than there is now. 

Urge and urge and urge, 
Always the procreant urge of the world. 

Always a knit of identity, always distinction, always a breed of life. 

Sure as the most certain sure, plumb in the uprights, well entretied, braced in the beams, 
Stout as a horse, affectionate, haughty, electrical, 
I and this mystery here we stand. 

Clear and sweet is my soul, and clear and sweet is all that is not my soul. 

Lack one lacks both, and the unseen is proved by the seen, 
Till that becomes unseen and receives proof in its turn. 

Showing the best and dividing it from the worst age vexes age, 
Knowing the perfect fitness and equanimity of things, while they discuss I am silent, and go bathe and admire myself. 

Welcome is every organ and attribute of me, and of any man hearty and clean, 
Not an inch nor a particle of an inch is vile, and none shall be less familiar than the rest. 

As the hugging and loving bed-fellow sleeps at my side through the night, and withdraws at the peep of the day with stealthy tread, 
Shall I postpone my acceptation and realization and scream at my eyes, 
That they turn from gazing after and down the road, 
And forthwith cipher and show me to a cent, 
Exactly the value of one and exactly the value of two, and which is ahead? 

4 
Trippers and askers surround me, 
People I meet, the effect upon me of my early life or the ward and city I live in, or the nation, 
The latest dates, discoveries, inventions, societies, authors old and new, 
My dinner, dress, associates, looks, compliments, dues, 
The real or fancied indifference of some man or woman I love, 
The sickness of one of my folks or of myself, or ill-doing or loss or lack of money, or depressions or exaltations, 
Battles, the horrors of fratricidal war, the fever of doubtful news, the fitful events; 
These come to me days and nights and go from me again, 
But they are not the Me myself. 

Apart from the pulling and hauling stands what I am, 
Stands amused, complacent, compassionating, idle, unitary, 
Looks down, is erect, or bends an arm on an impalpable certain rest, 
Looking with side-curved head curious what will come next, 
Both in and out of the game and watching and wondering at it. 

Backward I see in my own days where I sweated through fog with linguists and contenders, 
I have no mockings or arguments, I witness and wait. 

5 
I believe in you my soul, the other I am must not abase itself to you, 
And you must not be abased to the other. 

Loafe with me on the grass, loose the stop from your throat, 
Not words, not music or rhyme I want, not custom or lecture, not even the best, 

I mind how once we lay such a transparent summer morning, 
And parted the shirt from my bosom-bone, and plunged your tongue to my bare-stript heart, 

Swiftly arose and spread around me the peace and knowledge that pass all the argument of the earth, 
And I know that the hand of God is the promise of my own, 
And I know that the spirit of God is the brother of my own, 
And that all the men ever born are also my brothers, and the women my sisters and lovers, 
And that a kelson of the creation is love, 
And limitless are leaves stiff or drooping in the fields, 
And brown ants in the little wells beneath them, 

6 
A child said What is the grass? fetching it to me with full hands; 
How could I answer the child? I do not know what it is any more than he. 

I guess it must be the flag of my disposition, out of hopeful green stuff woven. 

Or I guess it is the handkerchief of the Lord, 
A scented gift and remembrancer designedly dropt, 

Or I guess the grass is itself a child, the produced babe of the vegetation. 

Or I guess it is a uniform hieroglyphic, 
And it means, Sprouting alike in broad zones and narrow zones, 
Growing among black folks as among white, 
Kanuck, Tuckahoe, Congressman, Cuff, I give them the same, I receive them the same. 

And now it seems to me the beautiful uncut hair of graves. 

Tenderly will I use you curling grass, 
It may be you transpire from the breasts of young men, 
It may be if I had known them I would have loved them, 

This grass is very dark to be from the white heads of old mothers, 
Darker than the colorless beards of old men, 
Dark to come from under the faint red roofs of mouths. 

O I perceive after all so many uttering tongues, 
And I perceive they do not come from the roofs of mouths for nothing. 

I wish I could translate the hints about the dead young men and women, 
And the hints about old men and mothers, and the offspring taken soon out of their laps. 

What do you think has become of the young and old men? 
And what do you think has become of the women and children? 

They are alive and well somewhere, 
The smallest sprout shows there is really no death, 
And if ever there was it led forward life, and does not wait at the end to arrest it, 

All goes onward and outward, nothing collapses, 
And to die is different from what any one supposed, and luckier. 

7 
Has any one supposed it lucky to be born? 
I hasten to inform him or her it is just as lucky to die, and I know it. 

And peruse manifold objects, no two alike and every one good, 
The earth good and the stars good, and their adjuncts all good. 

I am not an earth nor an adjunct of an earth, 
I am the mate and companion of people, all just as immortal and fathomless as myself, 
(They do not know how immortal, but I know.) 

Every kind for itself and its own, for me mine male and female, 
For me those that have been boys and that love women, 
For me the man that is proud and feels how it stings to be slighted, 
For me the sweet-heart and the old maid, for me mothers and the mothers of mothers, 
For me lips that have smiled, eyes that have shed tears, 
For me children and the begetters of children. 

Undrape! you are not guilty to me, nor stale nor discarded, 
I see through the broadcloth and gingham whether or no, 
And am around, tenacious, acquisitive, tireless, and cannot be shaken away. 

8 
The little one sleeps in its cradle, 
For there is a dram.
For there is a farthing.
A bushel for your thoughts.
A hand for your withered heights.

For I have jouled along attempting
to quire and wisp.

come down jiffy by shake to the tune
of leagues and stones.

For once I was your peckish darling.

For once there was the measure
of what an ox could plow
in a single morning.

For once the fother, the reed, the palm.

For one megalithic year I fixed my gaze
on the smiling meniscus, against the gray wall
of graduated cylinder.

For once I measured ten out of ten
on the scale of pain.

the bovate, the hide and hundredweight.

For in each pinch of salt, a whisper of doubt,
for in each medieval moment, emotion,

like an unruly cough syrup bottle,
uncapped. For though I dutifully swallowed

my banana doses, ascended, from welcome
to lanthorn, three barleycorns at a time,

I could not tackle the trudging, trenchant cart.

For now I am forty rods from your chain and bolt.
For now I am my six-sacked self.

I

Why should a foolish marriage vow,
  Which long ago was made,
Oblige us to each other now,
  When passion is decayed?
We loved, and we loved, as long as we could,
  Till our love was loved out in us both;
But our marriage is dead, when the pleasure is fled:

               II

If I have pleasures for a friend,
  And further love in store,
What wrong has he, whose joys did end,
  And who could give no more?
 Or that I should bar him of another:
For all we can gain, is to give ourselves pain,
  When neither can hinder the other.

If you refuse me once, and think again, 
By every one that hath a heart. 

Or do you think they more than once can die, 
Who tell you of a thousand deaths a day, 
They met, but in the common way? 

Nor is that right, they yield that first entreat; 
This heart too little, that too great. 

Oh that I were all soul, that I might prove 
As you are for an angel; for I know, 
None but pure spirits are fit loves for you. 

Your coarsest part is like a curious lawn, 
The vestal relics for a covering drawn. 

Your other parts, part of the purest fire 
A quintessence of goodness and of wit. 

That you can figure to yourself a fire 
Void of all heat, a love without desire. 

Nor in divinity do you go less; 
That souls may have a plenitude of joy, 
Although their bodies meet not to employ. 

But I must needs confess, I do not find 
So purified as yet, but at the best 
My body claims in them an interest. 

I hold that perfect joy makes all our parts 
Our senses tell us, if we please not them, 
Our love is but a dotage or a dream. 

How shall we then agree? you may descend, 
I fain would tune my fancy to your key, 
But cannot reach to that obstructed way. 

There rests but this, that whilst we sorrow here, 
And, when no more their joys they can extend, 
Then let our souls begin where they did end.

Let me make the songs for the people,
Songs to stir like a battle-cry
Not for the clashing of sabres,
But songs to thrill the hearts of men
Let me make the songs for the weary,
Till hearts shall relax their tension,
Let me sing for little children,
Sweet anthems of love and duty,
I would sing for the poor and aged,
Of the bright and restful mansions,
Our world, so worn and weary,
To hush the jangle and discords
Music to soothe all its sorrow,
And the hearts of men grown tender
No children;
Cold uncoils in the blood;
Science, true, not good
For you. So old,
Suddenly, or so young.
Lyric inside not to be sung.
Plug pulled, screen gone.
Sun out; mind
Bountiful, playing pain.
These are my children
In my head. Unbegotten.
This is to self-forget,
To have the future
Born forgotten.

Upon a day, came Sorrow in to me,
And Pain into my house for company.
Then, looking, I saw Love come silently,
Habited in black raiment, smooth and new,
And certainly the tears he shed were true.

Sorrow like a ceaseless rain
    Beats upon my heart.
Dawn will find them still again;
This has neither wax nor wane,
    Neither stop nor start.

People dress and go to town;
    I sit in my chair.
All my thoughts are slow and brown:
Standing up or sitting down
Little matters, or what gown
    Or what shoes I wear.

bodies in jealousy, bodies in battle, 
bodies growing disease like mushroom coral.
It is tiresome, tiresome, describing 
fir cones waiting for fires to catch their human ribs 
into some slow, future forest.

my complaints the same, his recourse 
the same, invoking the broad, cool sheet suffering drapes
over the living freeze of heart after heart, 
the face did not fashion its jutting jawbone 
to wail across the plains or beg the bare city. 

I will no longer tally the broken, ospreyed oceans, 
the figs that outlived summer 
or the tedious mineral angles and 
their suction of light. 

Have you died? Then speak. 
You must see the living 
are too small as they are, 
lonesome for more 
and in varieties of pain 
only you can bring into right view.

He forgets that he used to call me mariconcito-
 that I harbored years of hatred toward him
 while hoping to find my real father. My
 childhood memories of him reminding me
 I was my mother's son, not his. I tried
 to poison him once and scattered sharp nails
 inside the shoes in his closet. By the time one
 of his sons died of AIDS I was already lost
 in contempt for the man I blamed for everything.
 There was the time I was in love and he met my
 boyfriend. Now he forgets to go to the bathroom
 or where he is but he still remembers Michael
 and asks about him. I help him walk slowly
 outdoors to step outside the prison cell that is
 the tiny apartment with no windows in which
 I grew up abused by both of them. He barely
 understands. His fate has been torture. I know
 that I cannot be his savior. I used to pray for
 him to die but here he is slowly fading. In his
 eyes I see that he learned to love me and wishes
 he could take it all back. He is unable to recall
 those drunken nights and hateful words. I should
 do the same. I left a long time ago but he still
 remains haunted by the little boy who wanted
 to belong. Like him, I want to forget that we
 made mistakes and caused so much pain. I need
 for both of us to remember how he taught me
 how to ride a bike and how to swim and told
 me, better late than never, that he loved me and
 was proud of all I had done. I have to help him
 settle into his favorite chair and let him know that
 I forgive him. There is a place somewhere where
 he will call me hijo and I will know him as my dad.

small and frail but courageous enough to bear his weight and mana

high enough to keep us above the drowning and learning

Point and sail in any direction as long as you know
how to return home

You have to navigate the space between the borders
of your skin and the intelligence of the tongueless horizon

that will stretch until you understand the permanent silence
at the end of your voyage

and our islands are your anchor and launching site
for the universes that repeat and repeat

compulsive scrutiny of what is to come and fear

You may write me down in history
With your bitter, twisted lies,
You may trod me in the very dirt
But still, like dust, I'll rise.

Does my sassiness upset you?
Why are you beset with gloom?
Pumping in my living room.

Just like moons and like suns,
With the certainty of tides,
Just like hopes springing high,
Still I'll rise.

Did you want to see me broken?
Bowed head and lowered eyes?
Shoulders falling down like teardrops,
Weakened by my soulful cries?

Does my haughtiness offend you?
Don't you take it awful hard

You may shoot me with your words,
You may cut me with your eyes,
You may kill me with your hatefulness,

Does it come as a surprise
That I dance like I've got diamonds
At the meeting of my thighs?

I rise
I rise
I'm a black ocean, leaping and wide,
Welling and swelling I bear in the tide.

Leaving behind nights of terror and fear
I rise
I rise
Bringing the gifts that my ancestors gave,
I am the dream and the hope of the slave.
I rise
I rise
I rise.

and bought-out hostages, an odd drunk and those
renouncing the flying for good, and thought
that surely there must be worse places to touch
freedom. Between the tailfins and the gray town
in the distance, gravity cropped up only at a newsstand,
and fizzled out with the first bite of the octane damp,
the view of the parking bunkers and stacked hovels
by the motorway. Everything else, before and after,
could have fitted into half a cigarette, the sickly sunshine
and endless nights, the flags and oaths (the very language
I wanted to forget), the Celts, the Saxons, the housebroken
Vikings in crowded trains, hopping frozen behind stalls
selling tat to tourists. Not enough time for loving because of
other loves, nor codebooks nor guides except the perennial
A to Z of not giving offense. The words were always there,
smooth like pebbles (soap on the tongue), and sometimes
the mockery of a commonplace, like that time when we put
up a blackened Union Jack instead of curtains between us
and the Poles on the scaffolding across the road.
On occasions it seemed good enough to be happy or scared
with the rest, to bring home from the terraces and parades
that sly acceptance, to sit in the shadow of atavism as under
a palm tree, and chew blissfully on the sweet dirt, the taste
of the crowd. Or for an evening make a shortcut through
gained not lost, a fat compendium of patriotic verse;
loyalty at all, it fell on faces and disappeared with them,
on promises and smiles, crazy schemes for finding
undiscovered shores. The world, I thought, could be unfolded
anywhere, if only you could fit it into a travel bag, into a clear,
irrevocable word. It is strange perhaps that even today
I think the same, still in the same place, buried firmly
like a rock in a graveyard, as heavy, and as pointlessly
decorated by lightness. The vows of yesterday skim
the heights like animal shapes we recognize in passing
clouds; postcards sleep in the unread books. Just like
the nomadic tribes used to, I learn of myself only
with my feet now, from the single map that remained.
And when streets bring the shortened future a bit nearer,
with open palm I seek the roughness of the facades,
and in the friendly pain I find the coarse, unperfected
in the bellies of gigantic animals: wet and quiet, almost
pleasant, once you get used to the smell of those who
passed through before you, and the immutable truth
 Translated from the Bosnian
Translated from the Bosnian

She couldn't help but sting my finger,
clinging a moment before I flung her
to the ground. Her gold is true, not the trick
evening light plays on my roses.
She curls into herself, stinger twitching,
gilt wings folded. Her whole life just a few weeks,
and my pain subsided in a moment.
In the cold, she hardly had her wits to buzz.
No warning from either of us:
she sleeping in the richness of those petals,
then the hand, my hand, cupping the bloom
in devastating force, crushing the petals for the scent.
And she mortally threatened, wholly unaware
that I do this daily, alone with the gold last light,
in what seems to me an act of love.

The station platform, clean and broad, his stage  
for push-ups, sit-ups, hamstring stretch,  
as he laid aside his back pack, from which  
his necessaries bulged, as he bulged  
through jeans torn at butt, knee and thigh,  
We sat at a careful distance to spy  
on his performance, beside a woman  
How composed, complete and sane  
in her hands, her face where pain and wrong  
were etched, here becalmed, with faint chirps  
leaking from the headphones of her walkman.  

I wanted to be sure this was our island
so we could walk between the long stars by the sea
though your hips are slight and caught in the air
like a moth at the end of a river around my arms
I am unable to understand the sun your dizzy spells
when you form a hand around me on the sand

I offer you my terrible sanity
the eternal voice that keeps me from reaching you
though we are close to each other every autumn
I feel the desperation of a giant freezing in cement
when I touch the door you're pressed against
the color of your letter that reminds me of flamingos

isn't that what you mean?
the pleasure of hands and
lips wetter than the ocean
or the brilliant pain of
breathless teeth in a
turbulent dream on a roof
while I thought of nothing
else except you against
the sky as I unfolded you
like my very life a liquid
signal of enormous love we
invented like a comet that
splits the air between us!

the earth looks shiny wrapped in steam and ermine
tired of us perspiring at every chance on the floor
below I bring you an ash tray out of love for the
ice palace because it is the end of summer the end
of the sun because you are in season like a blue
peel my eyes with your great surfaces seem intimate
when we merely touch the thread of life and kiss
7.30.69

~~ & thus you entered
a forest of solitudes
where in this great
sense your life had
been pursued, till like
a shadow breaking off
a rising body, a
need hovered & grew.
Some lined feature of
another fate strives to
be met, sits low
& upright. Those qualities
which had been energy
or grace past pain
wove from the nerves
a nest or instinct.
Your calms are interesting.
Write to us during
this terrible government. A
universe coughs blue &
draws a twiceness from
the mitred now, while
your garden hand spells
the inexhaustible forms~~
 

Complacencies of the peignoir, and late 
Coffee and oranges in a sunny chair, 
Upon a rug mingle to dissipate 
The holy hush of ancient sacrifice. 
She dreams a little, and she feels the dark 
Encroachment of that old catastrophe, 
As a calm darkens among water-lights. 
The pungent oranges and bright, green wings 
Seem things in some procession of the dead, 
Winding across wide water, without sound. 
The day is like wide water, without sound, 
Stilled for the passing of her dreaming feet 
Over the seas, to silent Palestine, 
Dominion of the blood and sepulchre. 

Why should she give her bounty to the dead? 
What is divinity if it can come 
Only in silent shadows and in dreams? 
Shall she not find in comforts of the sun, 
In pungent fruit and bright, green wings, or else 
In any balm or beauty of the earth, 
Things to be cherished like the thought of heaven? 
Divinity must live within herself: 
Passions of rain, or moods in falling snow; 
Grievings in loneliness, or unsubdued 
Elations when the forest blooms; gusty 
Emotions on wet roads on autumn nights; 
All pleasures and all pains, remembering 
The bough of summer and the winter branch. 
These are the measures destined for her soul. 

Jove in the clouds had his inhuman birth. 
No mother suckled him, no sweet land gave 
Large-mannered motions to his mythy mind. 
He moved among us, as a muttering king, 
Magnificent, would move among his hinds, 
Until our blood, commingling, virginal, 
With heaven, brought such requital to desire 
The very hinds discerned it, in a star. 
Shall our blood fail? Or shall it come to be 
The blood of paradise? And shall the earth 
Seem all of paradise that we shall know? 
The sky will be much friendlier then than now, 
A part of labor and a part of pain, 
And next in glory to enduring love, 
Not this dividing and indifferent blue. 

Before they fly, test the reality 
Of misty fields, by their sweet questionings; 
But when the birds are gone, and their warm fields 
There is not any haunt of prophecy, 
Nor any old chimera of the grave, 
Neither the golden underground, nor isle 
Melodious, where spirits gat them home, 
Nor visionary south, nor cloudy palm 
Like her remembrance of awakened birds, 
Or her desire for June and evening, tipped 

Death is the mother of beauty; hence from her, 
Alone, shall come fulfilment to our dreams 
And our desires. Although she strews the leaves 
Of sure obliteration on our paths, 
The path sick sorrow took, the many paths 
Where triumph rang its brassy phrase, or love 
Whispered a little out of tenderness, 
She makes the willow shiver in the sun 
For maidens who were wont to sit and gaze 
Upon the grass, relinquished to their feet. 
She causes boys to pile new plums and pears 
On disregarded plate. The maidens taste 
And stray impassioned in the littering leaves. 

Is there no change of death in paradise? 
Does ripe fruit never fall? Or do the boughs 
Hang always heavy in that perfect sky, 
Unchanging, yet so like our perishing earth, 
With rivers like our own that seek for seas 
They never find, the same receding shores 
That never touch with inarticulate pang? 
Why set the pear upon those river-banks 
Or spice the shores with odors of the plum? 
Alas, that they should wear our colors there, 
The silken weavings of our afternoons, 
And pick the strings of our insipid lutes! 
Death is the mother of beauty, mystical, 
Within whose burning bosom we devise 
Our earthly mothers waiting, sleeplessly. 

Supple and turbulent, a ring of men 
Shall chant in orgy on a summer morn 
Their boisterous devotion to the sun, 
Not as a god, but as a god might be, 
Naked among them, like a savage source. 
Their chant shall be a chant of paradise, 
Out of their blood, returning to the sky; 
And in their chant shall enter, voice by voice, 
The windy lake wherein their lord delights, 
The trees, like serafin, and echoing hills, 
That choir among themselves long afterward. 
They shall know well the heavenly fellowship 
Of men that perish and of summer morn. 
And whence they came and whither they shall go 
The dew upon their feet shall manifest. 

She hears, upon that water without sound, 
Is not the porch of spirits lingering. 
We live in an old chaos of the sun, 
Or old dependency of day and night, 
Or island solitude, unsponsored, free, 
Of that wide water, inescapable. 
Deer walk upon our mountains, and the quail 
Whistle about us their spontaneous cries; 
Sweet berries ripen in the wilderness; 
And, in the isolation of the sky, 
At evening, casual flocks of pigeons make 
Ambiguous undulations as they sink, 
Downward to darkness, on extended wings.
I know what the caged bird feels, alas! 
And the river flows like a stream of glass; 
I know what the caged bird feels! 

I know why the caged bird beats his wing 
When he fain would be on the bough a-swing; 
I know why he beats his wing! 

I know why the caged bird sings, ah me, 
When he beats his bars and he would be free; 
It is not a carol of joy or glee, 
I know why the caged bird sings!

I. Pan Awakes: Summer Marches In
We practiced together,
sweat and stained.
We pummeled each other 
and laughed off pain.
Teams may disagree,
may tease,
may blame.
Teams may bicker and whine,
but get down for the game.

You had my back.
We fought the fight.
And though our score
was less last night,
we're walking tall.
Our team came through
and stuck together like Crazy Glue.
I'm proud to say
I lost with you.

Here is the place; right over the hill 
You can see the gap in the old wall still, 

There is the house, with the gate red-barred, 

There are the beehives ranged in the sun; 

A year has gone, as the tortoise goes, 
And the same rose blows, and the same sun glows, 

Tangles his wings of fire in the trees, 

I brushed off the burrs, and smoothed my hair, 

Down through the beeches I looked at last 

Before them, under the garden wall, 
Went drearily singing the chore-girl small, 

Trembling, I listened: the summer sun 
For I knew she was telling the bees of one 

Haply her blind old grandsire sleeps 

But her dog whined low; on the doorway sill, 
The old man sat; and the chore-girl still 

And the song she was singing ever since 

1

Requite this angel whose
flushed and thirsting face
stoops to the sacrifice
out of which it arose.
This is the lord Eros
of grief who pities
no one; it is
Lazarus with his sores.

2

And you, who with your soft but searching voice
drew me out of the sleep where I was lost,
who held me near your heart that I might rest
confiding in the darkness of your choice:
possessed by you I chose to have no choice,
fulfilled in you I sought no further quest.
You keep me, now, in dread that quenches trust,
in desolation where my sins rejoice.
As I am passionate so you with pain
turn my desire; as you seem passionless
so I recoil from all that I would gain,
wounding myself upon forgetfulness,
false ecstasies, which you in truth sustain
as you sustain each item of your cross.

3

Veni Redemptor, but not in our time.
Christus Resurgens, quite out of this world.
Amor Carnalis is our dwelling-place.

4

O light of light, supreme delight;
grace on our lips to our disgrace.
Time roosts on all such golden wrists;
our leanness is our luxury.
Our love is what we love to have;
our faith is in our festivals.

5

Stupefying images of grief-in-dream,
succubae to my natural grief of heart,
cling to me, then; you who will not desert
your love nor lose him in some blank of time.
You come with all the licence of her name
to tell me you are mine. But you are not
and she is not. Can my own breath be hurt
by breathless shadows groaning in their game?
It can. The best societies of hell
acknowledge this, aroused by what they know:
consummate rage recaptured there in full
as faithfulness demands it, blow for blow,
and rectitude that mimics its own fall
reeling with sensual abstinence and woe.

6

This is the ash-pit of the lily-fire,
this is the questioning at the long tables,
this is true marriage of the self-in-self,
this is a raging solitude of desire,
this is the chorus of obscene consent,
this is a single voice of purest praise.

7

He wounds with ecstasy. All
the wounds are his own.
He is the Lord of Misrule.
He is the Master of the Leaping Figures,
the motley factions.
Revelling in auguries
he is the Weeper of the Valedictions.

8

Music survives, composing her own sphere,
Angel of Tones, Medusa, Queen of the Air,
and when we would accost her with real cries
silver on silver thrills itself to ice.

Before the glimmer of his sunken eyes,
 What question could I answer with my lies?
 In him, his abdomen so thin the pain
 Is almost visible. I probe the lump
 His boyfriend noticed first, my left hand limp
 Beneath the pressure of the right. With AIDS
 It strikes me suddenly I will oblige 
 This hunger that announces death is near,
 And as I touch him, cold and cavalier,
 The language of beneath the diaphragm
 The body reveling until it wrecks
 Against the same internal, hidden shoal,

I.

The nest was at rest for a time, not being
made. Before the eggs were laid, it softened.
The robin sleeping. Inside the house,
the sound of laundry
in the dryer, the sound of a zipper
tumbling inside
the apparatus, and shirts with buttons,
as well as napkins
and a tablecloth printed with blueberries
and stalks of lily of the valley, oval,
for the table with claw legs
and extra leaves for guests.

II.

In one account, the angels come, their hands
emerging from their wings like sentences
staying, as long as it takes,
for the windows to go from indigo
to black, as long
as it takes for a breath to land in the base
of the belly, in the cavity
wisdom tells us wisdom comes from
or first dwells in, before it navigates
the narrows of the throat, becomes mantra,
becomes guttural, becomes spit to aspirate
the language the mouth makes.
The native obligation of this account
to its subject is care. The form
of music the wind chime makes
registers the commitment
of a furious system, filled with
conviction, to the continued
transformation of what
is. Do not ask what has been
lost. Ask what changed. An instrument
of will, the guitar echoes this, a chord,
more reminder than absolute, the hand
arouses but does not create the scale.
In this way what rests gets taken up.

III.
 
In another, the mind makes a decision
to end its disorder. The mind wants first
to end the face. The subject
has had enough, one too many
figures walking through the orchard, the call
and response of conversation
become an imposition on some other world
unbroken by the idea of separate bodies,
an idea one has never been convinced of,
and so now it is a relief to believe
what one has suspected, that separation
a trick of perspective, though such a revelation
does not undo the fatigue of existing
in the continuing illusions of others. And yet, the obligation
to be kind, to show interest in strangers
when they visit with flowers, to family
whose hands are empty, and to doctors,
not to mention the pain.

IV.
 
In the last account, the explosions
are too small to be seen, and oxygen
takes both thirst and hunger away
as it ceases to find a home in the lungs,
and the patient, having ceased to feel, ceases
to breathe, as the heart shuts down
before the brain and shuts
the dreaming down, the settling on a nest
of images, not feeling any form of distress.
The pathways to distress are blocked,
but the senses doubled, the ears know
the house more than they ever did,
whose clothes occupy the dryer,
which voice accompanies water.

V.
Angels be patient with this subject.
I know what she would say to you
if she could speak,
you just inside the window whose top right
pane frames what we call a family,
when the almost mother bird
finishes what she is thinking about,
barely but still hidden from sight.
If you stopped to look at the nest
you would see a sleep so purposeful
the ladder of adoration would reverse
and you would stay on earth.

And with great fear I inhabit the middle of the night
What wrecks of the mind await me, what drugs
to dull the senses, what little I have left,
what more can be taken away?

The fear of travelling, of the future without hope
or buoy. I must get away from this place and see
that there is no fear without me: that it is within
unless it be some sudden act or calamity

to land me in the hospital, a total wreck, without
memory again; or worse still, behind bars. If
I could just get out of the country. Some place
where one can eat the lotus in peace.

For in this country it is terror, poverty awaits; or
am I a marked man, my life to be a lesson
or experience to those young who would trod
the same path, without God

unless he be one of justice, to wreak vengeance
on the acts committed while young under un-
due influence or circumstance. Oh I have
always seen my life as drama, patterned

after those who met with disaster or doom.
Is my mind being taken away me.
I have been over the abyss before. What
is that ringing in my ears that tells me

all is nigh, is naught but the roaring of the winter wind.
Woe to those homeless who are out on this night.
Woe to those crimes committed from which we
can walk away unharmed.

So I turn on the light
And smoke rings rise in the air.
Do not think of the future; there is none.
But the formula all great art is made of.

Pain and suffering. Give me the strength
to bear it, to enter those places where the
great animals are caged. And we can live
at peace by their side. A bride to the burden

that no god imposes but knows we have the means
to sustain its force unto the end of our days.
For that is what we are made for; for that
we are created. Until the dark hours are done.

And we rise again in the dawn.
Infinite particles of the divine sun, now
worshipped in the pitches of the night.

I have to thank God I'm a woman,
For in these ordered days a woman only
Is free to be very hungry, very lonely.

It is sad for Feminism, but still clear
That man, more often than woman, is pioneer.
If I would confide a new thought,
First to a man must it be brought.

Now, for our sins, it is my bitter fate
That such a man wills soon to be my mate,
And so of friendship is quick end:
When I have gained a love I lose a friend.

It is well within the order of things
That man should listen when his mate sings;
But the true male never yet walked
Who liked to listen when his mate talked.

I would be married to a full man,
As would all women since the world began;
But from a wealth of living I have proved
I must be silent, if I would be loved.

Now of my silence I have much wealth,
I have to do my thinking all by stealth.
My thoughts may never see the day;
My mind is like a catacomb where early Christians pray.

And of my silence I have much pain,
But of these pangs I have great gain;
For I must take to drugs or drink,
Or I must write the things I think.

I would be very lazy and most weak;
I should speak only, and the things I spoke
Would fill the air awhile, and clear like smoke.

The things I think now I write down,
And some day I will show them to the Town.
When I am sad I make thought clear;
I can re-read it all next year.

I have to thank God I'm a woman,
For in these ordered days a woman only
Is free to be very hungry, very lonely.

We were a Colored Clan of Kinfolk
Over our shoulders
Who tendered close the bible
Who grew and passed around the almanac at night
What to plant at first light

Black soil and sweet brown sorghum
From the every morning biscuits
Mama Susan fixed
Dripping and mixing
Up under our fingernails
A secret salve
Just like any other
Living simple
And keeping to our proud selves
Quite aware of night riders
Politicious smiles
Cologned with kerosene and match

Aware of just whose feet
Walked across our tin roofs at night

We were such light sleepers
Such long distance believers

We were a family pregnant
Whose water had broke
And for once there was ham money
So we thought to do better by ourselves
To begin our next row
We would go and get him
Because he was medically degreed in baby bringing
Because he was young and white and handsome
And because of that
Had been neighbor to more knowledge

And because he came with his papers in his pocket
After his ivy graduation
Telling us times had changed
Even though we had all been caught
By tried and true Black Grannies
Who lay ax blade sharp side up
And water pan underneath the bed
To cut the pain
To cool the fever

We were a Pregnant Clan of Kinfolk
Caught with water running down our legs
Going to fetch him
Telling him that it was time
That he should come now
Not right away
But came when he wanted
The next day
After his breakfast

But what more
Could we colored country folk ever want
Even if we had to watch the road all night for him
Even if we had to not let her push too hard
When he finally came
He had his papers on him
Something with one of those pretty shiny seals
Old family say they can remember
But we opened the screen for him anyway
Trusting
And tendering close what the Good Book
Had told us all our lives to do

Then we made him a path
Her precious private pleasing place

Then he pulled my daddy through
And from the first he pulled him wrong
And wrong
Shattered his collarbone
And snapped his soft baby foot in half
And smashed the cartilage in his infant hand

Wringing
Their own sun baked arms
Old timey family
Remember him well
As he came through the door
A day later
His breakfast digested now
How he had two waters on him
One trying to throw snow quilt over the other
As he un-carefully
As drunkenly
He with his papers on him still
Stood there turning a brown baby into blue
Un-magically
And right before our eyes

Hope and Pray
Hope and Pray

With all of his official training
The Virginia land of Cumberland County

He left and forgot
The afterbirth inside
Carlene Godwin Finney

To clabber
Gangrene
Close down
Her place
Her precious private pleasing place
To fill the house to the rafters
Up past the dimpled tin roof
With a rotting smell
That stayed for nine days
That mortgaged a room
In our memories
And did not die with her

We were a Brown and Pregnant Family
And left his bottle
Recollected his manners
And brought his right mind
Had another klan called him to their bedside
Had matched the color of his own but

We were a Colored Clan of Kinfolk
Made him open up his mouth and blow
Breathe out right there
Into all of our brown and lined up faces
In wait of his worthiness

Then just for good measure
Just to be sure
Then Aunt Nanny
Give him the final once over
And hold his sterile hands
Down to the firelight to check
Just like she checked our own every night
Before supper
Before we were allowed to sit
At her very particular table

Enter and leave through her eyes
Everyday at her leisure

As she traveled all up and through him
And caught his incapable belligerent incompetence
In time

Oh Jesus

Have him from the first
By the back of his pants
And swirl him around
Just like he picked us up
And swirled us around
Anytime he caught us lying or lazy
Or being less than what we were

Loose on him from the start
High eye to the sun
And looked straight through him
Just like he held us up
And then we would have known first
Like he always knew first
And brought to us
The very map of his heart
Then we would have known
Just what his intentions were
With our Carlene

Before we knew his name
Or cared about his many degrees
While we stood there
Some of us throwing good black soil
With one hand
Some of us tending close
The Good Book with the other
Believing and trusting
We were doing better
By this one
Standing there

Waterfalls running
Screaming whitewater rapids

Down our pants legs
Down our pantaloons
To our many selves

Praying hard
That maybe we were wrong
(please make us wrong)
One hundred proof
Smelled the same as
Isopropyl

Luggage first, the lining of his suit jacket dangling
Nimbly he backs out of the taxi

Eyes nervously extending, like brave crabs
Everywhere at once, keeping track of his papers
He pilots himself into the home berth

Like a small tug in a cloud of seagulls
Worries flutter around him so thick
It takes him some time to arrive

When the blue eyes blur
And stare out to sea

Or a long pain that silences him
In such gray distances

Turning to you, the delicate mouth
Like a magician

Is curious, sensitive, playing tricks,
Pouting like a wise turtle
It seems he has a secret

With the driver,
With the stewardess on the airplane
So that even when he opens his arms

When the warm voice surrounds you,
Wraps you in rough bliss,
Just before you go under

Suddenly you remember:
The beloved does not come
From nowhere: out of himself, alone

Often he comes slowly, carefully
After a long taxi ride
Past many beautiful men and women

And many dead bodies,
Mysterious and important companions.

The Artichoke 

She bore only the heart,  
Worked at the stem with her  
Fingers, pulling it to her,  
And into her, like a cord. 

She would sustain him,  
Would cover his heart.  
The hairy needles 
And the bigger leaves, 

These she licked into shape,  
Tipping each with its point.  
He is the mud-flower, 
The thorny hugger. 

The Asparagus 

She sent packs of great beasts to pass 
Over him, trailing belly-fur and dust,  
Bending their nostrils to his frail spear.  
This was to toughen him. For what?  
Stupidly, like a squirrel, standing up,  
Looking here and there, looking to all sides, 

He is cut down and taken away. 
She can smell him steaming, his crowns  
Already tender, his spine giving in. 
Now he is threatening to wither terribly,  
And slip from the water altogether, 
And billow through the kitchen like prayer. 

The Cauliflower 

Her words clot in his head. 
He presses himself to remember  
And feels the skin peel back, 
The skull bleach, crack, fall away. 

All that's left of him is the brain, 
Its tissue knotting up to shade him,  
The pain of its light pulsing 
How to move, how to move. 

Herbs 

Before fog leaves the scrub-oak 
Or the grasses of the downland, 
Take dragonwort under the black alder,  
The belladonna, the deadly nightshade.  
Free them as you would a spider's web,  
Singing over them: Out, little wen, 
Sing this into the mouth of the woman. 

Corn 

I am the corn quail.  
What I do is quick.  
You will know only  
The scurry, the first  
Shiver of feathers  
And I will be up,  
I will be in your 
Head with no way out,  
Wings beating at the  
Air behind your eyes. 

Celery 

The hope with  
water is that it 
will conceal nothing, 

that a clearness 
will follow upon it  
like the clearness  
after much rain, 

or the clearness  
where the air  
reaches to the river 
and touches it, 

where the rain  
falls from the trees  
into the river. 

Bell Pepper 

To find enough rooms for the gathering  
The walls go on alone not waiting  
For corners but thinking of sleeves 
And how the wind fills them and the snow  
Fills them and how cold it is without  
Fires when there are not enough rooms. 

Potatoes 

It had been growing in her like vegetables.  
She was going into the ground where it could  
Do better, where she could have potatoes. 

They would be small and easily mistaken  
For stones. It would fall to her to  
Sort them out, persuade them to stay 

Close to her, comforting her, letting her  
Wear them on her body, in her hair,  
Helping her hold always very still.
When the forests have been destroyed their darkness remains  
The ash the great walker follows the possessors 
Forever 
Nothing they will come to is real 
Nor for long 
Over the watercourses 
Like ducks in the time of the ducks 
The ghosts of the villages trail in the sky 
Making a new twilight 

Rain falls into the open eyes of the dead  
Again again with its pointless sound 
When the moon finds them they are the color of everything 

The nights disappear like bruises but nothing is healed  
The dead go away like bruises 
The blood vanishes into the poisoned farmlands  
Pain the horizon 
Remains 
Overhead the seasons rock 
They are paper bells 
Calling to nothing living 

The possessors move everywhere under Death their star  
Like columns of smoke they advance into the shadows  
Like thin flames with no light 
They with no past 
And fire their only future

To wed, or not to wed; that is the question; 
The bills and house rent of a wedded fortune, 
And by declining cut her. To wed; to smoke 
No more; And have a wife at home to mend 
The holes in socks and shirts 
Devoutly to be wished. To wed for life; 
For in that married life what fights may come, 
When we have honeymooning ceased 
That makes the joy of single life. 
Canned goods for tea, the dying furnace fire; 
The pangs of sleepless nights when baby cries; 
The pain of barking shins upon a chair and 
Closing waists that button down the back, 
When he himself might all these troubles shirk 
With a bare refusal? Who would bundles bear, 
And grunt and sweat under a shopping load? 
Who would samples match; buy rats for hair, 
Cart cheese and crackers home to serve at night 
For lunch to feed your friends; play pedro 
After tea; sing rag time songs, amusing 
Friendly neighbors. Buy garden tools 
To lend unto the same. Stay home at nights 
In smoking coat and slippers and slink to bed 
Thus duty does make cowards of us all, 
And thus the native hue of matrimony 
And thus the gloss of marriage fades away, 
And loses its attraction.

Rudolph Reed was oaken.
His wife was oaken too.
And his two good girls and his good little man
Oakened as they grew.

I am not hungry for bread.
But hungry hungry for a house
Where at night a man in bed

Stir as if in pain.
May never hear the roaches
Falling like fat rain.

Go blinking through the gloom.
Where every room of many rooms
Will be full of room.

Or north or south behind it.
All I know is I shall know it,

It was in a street of bitter white
That he made his application.
For Rudolph Reed was oakener
Than others in the nation.

Corroded to a grin.
Why, you black old, tough old hell of a man,
Move your family in! 

Nary a grin grinned Rudolph Reed,
Nary a curse cursed he,
But moved in his House. With his dark little wife,
And his dark little children three.

A neighbor would look, with a yawning eye
That squeezed into a slit.
But the Rudolph Reeds and the children three
Were too joyous to notice it.

For were they not firm in a home of their own
With windows everywhere
And a beautiful banistered stair
And a front yard for flowers and a back yard for grass?

The first night, a rock, big as two fists.
The second, a rock big as three.
But nary a curse cursed Rudolph Reed.
(Though oaken as man could be.)

The third night, a silvery ring of glass.
Patience ached to endure.
Was staining her gaze so pure.

Then up did rise our Rudolph Reed
And pressed the hand of his wife,
And went to the door with a thirty-four
And a beastly butcher knife.

He ran like a mad thing into the night.
And the words in his mouth were stinking.
By the time he had hurt his first white man
He was no longer thinking.

By the time he had hurt his fourth white man
Rudolph Reed was dead.
His neighbors gathered and kicked his corpse.

Small Mabel whimpered all night long,
For calling herself the cause.
Her oak-eyed mother did no thing
But change the bloody gauze.

Embrowned and beery losels all: 
Within low doors the slugs of boors 
Laze and yawn and doze again. 

In dreams they doze, the drowsy boors, 
Their hazy hovel warm and small: 
Within low doors the basking boors 
Snugly hug the ember-mound. 

Sleepless, I see the slumberous boors 
Their blurred eyes blink, their eyelids fall: 
Within low doors the boozy boors 
Cat-naps take in pipe-bowl light.

It is about screaming pain on a Sunday
Hailing a cab and head racing
To the hospital, now so close to the new apartment
I had a baby inside of me
But no one expected it to happen so fast
Maybe they expected it to happen so fast
All along
Alone in the waiting room I shook and shook
And the blood ran down my legs
Later with the magnesium
I thought of the many permutations of the bald head
Pale, pickling fish skin, glowing with scales
When she came out, she was dark and full of hair
No blood, but born in the caul
Like the other magical realities of my past accomplishments
When she came out she cried and it sounded like me
But passed me, into her new reality
Now 3 weeks later, they say I am still not an erotic object
So I wander the park in the snow with my friend
We light candles and pray to the darkness
We light the park on fire and the police come and find us
I am a mother after all
They say, but where is your baby
And I say, no no, my baby my baby
They say, yes yes, look at your beautiful baby
I say, I do, I do
Look, look, and listen
My baby my baby

The Bison is vain, and (I write it with pain)

Dark as the clouds of even,
 Ranked in the western heaven,
 Waiting the breath that lifts
 All the dread mass, and drifts
 Tempest and falling brand
 So still and orderly,
 Arm to arm, knee to knee,
 Waiting the great event,
 Stands the Black Regiment.
 Down the long dusky line
 Teeth gleam and eyeballs shine;
 And the bright bayonet,
 Bristling and firmly set,
 Flashed with a purpose grand,
 Long ere the sharp command
 Of the fierce rolling drum
 Told them their time had come,
 Told them what work was sent
 For the Black Regiment.
 Let the whole nation see
 If we are fit to be
 Free in this land; or bound
 Bound with red stripes of pain
 Oh, what a shout there went
 From the Black Regiment!
 Onward the bondmen broke;
 Bayonet and sabre-stroke
 Vainly opposed their rush.
 With but one thought aflush,
 Driving their lords like chaff,
 Or at the slippery brands
 Leaping with open hands,
 Down they tear man and horse,
 Down in their awful course;
 Tramping with bloody heel
 Over the crashing steel,
 All their eyes forward bent,
 Rushed the Black Regiment.
 Ah! And they meant the word,
 Not a mere party shout:
 They gave their spirits out;
 Trusted the end to God,
 And on the gory sod
 Rolled in triumphant blood.
 Glad to strike one free blow,
 Whether for weal or woe;
 Glad to breathe one free breath,
 Though on the lips of death.
 That they might fall again,
 So they could once more see
 That burst to liberty!
 To this Black Regiment.
 Hundreds on hundreds fell;
 But they are resting well;
 Scourges and shackles strong
 Never shall do them wrong.
 Oh, to the living few,
 Soldiers, be just and true!
 Hail them as comrades tried;
 Fight with them side by side;
 Never, in field or tent,
 Scorn the Black Regiment.

To pass through astonishment and know much too late.
And because habit makes us strange, I find myself
Searching on a landscape that generates questions
Beyond its ability to solve. That dark post
And your shadows that petal around you. And what
Those prolonged moments of silence, incongruous
And revealing as metaphor, most frequently.
For instance: waiting at the bus stop in Pai in
A midmorning the hue of the roadside guardrails
That passed by like the so many phenomena
Of our days blurred together into a motion,
I waited under the thatched roof of the station
With other travelers. With each in our common
Solitude risen around like that Haydn piece
In the tunnel I descended into on my
Way out onto Broadway from the 1 train some months
Ago, it seemed of Hopper. Star fruit on the ground
Like some lost Stephano, Trinculo, and their lamed,
And when each moment with expectations for more
Expectation fills up the day as does your breath
A balloon, the day floats with such care and strange hours.

2

My hands grow differently used. While one hand thumbs
Pages, the other hand steadies open the book.
A gnat flattened between pinky and ring finger;
Fits my Discman, plugged in while watching those around
(No news-as-white-noise here to occupy my sight):
Kids who bus to school hours away toothpicking
Slivers of chili-dappled mango slices in;
A triple-sweatered lady palming back her hair
In the thick Thai pre-dawn June; the one foreigner
Other than us, earphone couched; and her shape, dozed slack,
Coat-blanketed, neck against my side. One hand rests.
Half a day ago, under a mosquito net,
Flush with the desk fan sitting on the rattan floor,
One hand kept on the steady act of beckoning
Behind the tongue-swelled clit, uncreasing the ridged roof,
Like rubbing the dampened cave wall, finger-darkened,
As the guide turns his back to us. The other hand
The other hand then stilled her hip, mosquito net,
Weighted, walling out stitches of ants, from its hook
Oddly, only one hand drums along (the CD:
If this were a concert. The other hand just bides
Riddled useless at Lepanto, a bullet lodged
Remembers and betrays. The other hand cries out,
Even after thumb-knuckle tempted a sander
In shop class, impulse from imagining too much.
We write). Each hand on different shaded denim thighs,
The unclipped nails crude halos of sun-blocking hills.
One hand lets forth words; the other hand holds it back.

3

Chased by a three-legged dog to the temple stairs,
Past all the fallen star fruit (the veined tips the last
To wither, the through-light flesh sun- and bug-eaten),
(Four hundred!) as we stopped to catch a break mid-flight.
Our breath would last us a run-through of the temple,
And unwilled smile facing the morning that just passed,
The sun no longer in front of his propped body,
But above it, the valley overabundant
With the real light that stole our day. The fog too lifted
Against my sight. We paused. Having just climbed the hill,
We agreed to leave our shoes on despite sandals
Stationed on the stoop, and then we turned towards that hall.
To idle back out the station; the attendants
Scoop up the wood wedges and clatter the door shut;
The passengers all shift. In the chapter among
The deformed and footless, Zhuangzi ends, arguing
For the greatest of men, a man void of feelings:
The sun, you, travel. And back again, the thick fog
Parts us from the obliterating Turner sun.
Pretty soon, come day, the motorbikes The Rough Guide
Says all tourists should try will buzz by those three dogs,
All lethargic, the largest too tired to dry-hump,
The mottled one coiled back like the dog that badgers
Not looking at us, but rather caught looking back,
My turn now to sleep. I can dab off from my jeans
Your drool just reaching my thigh as you do, with care,
Still spots our many beds with different aged salt-rings,
Each gasp less a sound than a failure at silence.
Before us another strange town, while for others
School, home, maybe work, a field, someplace normal, there,
Someplace beyond sight from its roadside stop. Abroad
To the yet-to-be-seen man behind you as yours.
These are the lines on which a committee is formed.
The Committee is a true reflection of the will of the people.
The Committee meets regularly, wherever it can.
This is a defense committee. Unfinished business:
This is the procedure of such a committee:

i

force a rose from the sand. The thirty-third canto

cores the dawn clouds with concentric radiance,
bois-pain, tree of bread, slave food, the bliss of John Clare,

lacing his boots with vines, steering glazed beetles

Frost whitening his stubble, he stands in the ford
of a brook like the Baptist lifting his branches to bless

cathedrals and snails, the breaking of this new day,
with the traffic of insects going to work anyway.

the souls and sails of circling gulls rhyme with:

in marinas whose masts agree, in crescent melons

left all night in the fridge, in the Egyptian labours
of ants moving boulders of sugar, words in this sentence,
shadow and light, who live next door like neighbours,

and in sardines with pepper sauce. My mother lies
yet the bounty returns each daybreak, to my surprise,

to my surprise and betrayal, yes, both at once.
I behold their industry and they are giants.

There on the beach, in the desert, lies the dark well
near a pool of fresh tears, tolled by the golden bell

of allamanda, thorns of the bougainvillea, and that is
even those that flourish elsewhere, vetch, ivy, clematis,

not for the Tourist Board or for Dante Alighieri,
but because there is no other path for its wheel to take

except to make the ruts of the beach road an allegory
of a crowning wreath of false laurel; so, John Clare, forgive me,

milk with two packets of artificial sugar,
as I watch these lines grow and the art of poetry harden me

of Mamma entering the standard elegiac.
No, there is grief, there will always be, but it must not madden,

of the world in a bead of dew on clematis or vetch,
and the fire in these tinder-dry lines of this poem I hate

of cavalry under your cloak; come on now, enough!

piles up these signatures like inscriptions of seaweed

of an outcrop (and I hope this settles the matter

of presences). No soul was ever invented,
yet every presence is transparent; if I met her
(in her nightdress ankling barefoot, crooning to the shallows),

Then he stopped
dead on the sidewalk
astounded
to overhear himself
say quite distinctly
I quit,
Pandemonium
in the cerebral
combs, unprecedented
mass desertions, solar
flare-ups.
It said
itself
actually;
the lips moved 
not, no thought was
taken. With massive finality
and apropos of absolutely
nothing it came,
a cruel blessing,
the ultimate low
note of an organ
made of ice or a passing
night train
of black holes. He
what else was he
pressed to one ear, emitting
a molecular hum. (Ever wonder
how they fit a whole
hive inside one
of them?) Minute
hand starting to disappear,
such was its speed
by now; on his face
an expression
of guarded rapture.
No one could do a thing
gaze down
in disgust
and concern, a moment before
they hurried on or,
without looking,
adroitly moved
around him, the way you would
in such cases there is a line
that no one crosses.
You know what
everyone just stands around
and waits for the arrival
of the ambulance; the mind simply stops, nothing,
silence. Then
the most silver,
the tiniest
sound
of a fracture
like that of an ice cube
dropped in vodka
can be heard
around the world;
people freeze
their minds, those persistent
illusions in pain,
or shame. But all
is soon forgotten,
the sunlight appears
all at once like
a great shadow
and floats with the gas-like hush
throughout the twelve spokes,
the brilliant yellow darkness
of the twelve candlelit
hallways forever
abandoned, forever
emanating out from
the one central
hexagonal chamber
so much larger than all
the rest, in which
the young queen lies
dreaming, amazed,
eyes open wide
inside
her lead-lined matchbox
rocking bed,
tits up
dead, immovable
sow, maggot
in color.

sing his songs, and remember him. 

so I sed why John?
John sez I got the bill for my insurance
I done told him that would be just fine
when he ast a week ago but
LaVerne she went and opened the damn envelope
on a chain letter and I aint got no time
to write out twenty copies
I got to get that hay finished
so what am I posta do now?

I sez what John? John sez
sends them things out I know it
and it works with the post office and
the insurance to keep you in line
I sez what John?

John sez my brother oncet
he got this chain letter back home
to write out his copies neither
it sez he has four days to wrote it
before the luck comes good or bad
it aint never good I heard of
be he forgot
back then it was $5,000 this feller got
in four days and then later
when the govament ruint the money
he put on a zero it was $50,000
and then it was $100,000
now it sez he got $420,000
that letter back then
just the numbers changed
to let us know how much
wrote out his twenty letters
he lost all that money
but my brother he was busy too

the third day after
he had to go kill these pigs
for this man but this other feller
was gone bring his milkcow down
he told him go ahead and do it
walk her down the road
so while my brother was gone
his boy brought her down
turnt her in the corral
he climbt up on the fence to watch

it might of been fine
except the hogs been rooting
up under the barn wall
my brother he borrowed
this lectric fence
he strung it along the side of the barn
so the bull mounts up on the milkcow
she turns and backs him up
he gets his back feet
tangled in that lectric fence
one in front and one back
he tries to move and he just tightens
up the lectric wire
that boy he sez you could hear it
zzip zzip zipp that bull
he starts to bellering
tighter against the barn
he commences to jumping up and down
on her and trying to get his feet
loost of that lectric wire
but he caint it goes zzip
he bellers and she backs up more
it goes zzip again
it was like he was doing a dance
like them crazy people do
trying to get his legs loost
hollering like a sonofabitch

so it was hogs there too
they heard it and here they come
stay that way around them
it has to get right or go away or die
that boy sez they all run up
grunted and squolt like hell
this one old mean bitching sow
she run right in between them
she bit that bull right on his seeds
she wanted him to stop acting that way
making all that noise
jumping up and down like that
right now

that bull he just went over backwards
right up against the barn
knocked the whole goddam end
of the barn down
fell right on his back
the end rafter come down
on his chest it torn a piece of skin off
his pecker to his seeds
wide as your hand
they swolt up like basketballs
from the hogbite
broke ribs they figured
but it never did kill him
she kept backing up
and fell down right on top of him
it was only the end of the barn
come down the rest stood up
he sed he seen enough for oncet

my brother that night
he never knew none of this happened yet
his picking finger on his left hand
in the leaf springs of a wagon
and doing the gears and picking
with his right hand
his pickup lights listening
to the radio because his battery
while he was driving
he thot he could
he hit this big chuckhole
slung him right into the steering wheel
he figured it would of broke his nose
but his hand took the cushion
it only gave him a nosebleed
but almost broke his hand
where it hit
his knuckles was bruised so bad
his fingers for a week
he had to drive the rest of the way home
left-handed and lean acrost
and shift with that hand too
he thot the other one was broke
he got home and the first thing
he seen was the end of his barn out
that bull standing there
inside the barn with his head down low
he run in the house to get his gun
he was mad he would of kilt that bull
but they told him how it happened
he went out to look
get that bull to go back in that yard
where them pigs was
they him him acrost the butt

they went in the house
my brother he got out the dishpan
and soaked some cold water
so he lain his hand in it
to get the swollen to go down
at first but while he was setting there
with his hand ducked
he remembered that chain letter
he jumped up and run to get it
sloshed water all over the kitchen floor
they sez it happened this morning
it was just his morning
IN LIGHT ROOM IN DARK HELL IN UMBER IN CHROME,
smoke the drain and flow of motion of exhaustion, the long sounds of cars
on the wall. I sit or stand. Caught in the net of glints from corner table to

Two floors up, at the corner of Hearst and Shattuck,
he nudges his head a sweaty mile
to the edge of the pillow. It takes a while.
His brilliant bloodshot light-blue eyes
he would like his chicken burrito
How does the body live its only life
in a cage? I watch him compute the distance
from bar to bar, and squeeze
between them
with a violent compression, a fury of bursting free
the rooted intractable weight
of matter. I watch him slyly, I check out
the way he does it. He
weighs what it weighs.
a gritty eruption of rock, salt and breath.
on a propped keyboard, the mouth-stick
wobbling between his teeth.

WELL, what's the matter ? there's a face
    What ! has it cut a vein ?
And is it quite a shocking place ?
    Come, let us look again.

I see it bleeds, but never mind
    That tiny little drop ;
I don't believe you'll ever find
    That crying makes it stop.

'Tis sad indeed to cry at pain,
    For any but a baby ;
If that should chance to cut a vein,
    We should not wonder, may be.

But such a man as you should try
    To bear a little sorrow :
So run along, and wipe your eye,
    'Twill all be well to-morrow.

The brain forgets but the blood will remember.
There, when the play of sense is over,
The last, low spark in the darkest chamber
Will hold all there is of love and lover.

The war of words, the life-long quarrel
Of self against self will resolve into nothing;
Less than the chain of berry-red coral
Crying against the dead black of her clothing.

What has the brain that it hopes to last longer?
The blood will take from forgotten violence,
The groping, the break of her voice in anger.
There will be left only color and silence.

These will remain, these will go searching
Your veins for life when the flame of life smolders;
The night that you two saw the mountains marching
Up against dawn with the stars on their shoulders;

As you drew her under them, easing her pain;
The notes, not the words, of a half-finished sentence;
The music, the silence. . . . These will remain.

Blow out, you bugles, over the rich Dead! 
These laid the world away; poured out the red 
Sweet wine of youth; gave up the years to be 
Their sons, they gave, their immortality. 

Blow, bugles, blow! They brought us, for our dearth, 
Honour has come back, as a king, to earth, 
And Nobleness walks in our ways again; 

He drowsed and was aware of silence heaped 
 Round him, unshaken as the steadfast walls; 
 Soaring and quivering in the wings of sleep.
 Silence and safety; and his mortal shore 
 Lipped by the inward, moonless waves of death. 
 Someone was holding water to his mouth. 
 He swallowed, unresisting; moaned and dropped 
 Through crimson gloom to darkness; and forgot 
 The opiate throb and ache that was his wound. 
 Bird-voiced, and bordered with reflected flowers 
 He dipped contented oars, and sighed, and slept. 
 Night, with a gust of wind, was in the ward, 
 Blowing the curtain to a gummering curve. 
 Night. He was blind; he could not see the stars 
 Glinting among the wraiths of wandering cloud; 
 Queer blots of colour, purple, scarlet, green, 
 Flickered and faded in his drowning eyes. 
 Fragrance and passionless music woven as one; 
 Warm rain on drooping roses; pattering showers 
 That soak the woods; not the harsh rain that sweeps 
 Gently and slowly washing life away. 

 He stirred, shifting his body; then the pain 
 Leaped like a prowling beast, and gripped and tore 
 His groping dreams with grinding claws and fangs. 
 But someone was beside him; soon he lay 
 Shuddering because that evil thing had passed. 
 Light many lamps and gather round his bed. 
 Lend him your eyes, warm blood, and will to live. 
 Speak to him; rouse him; you may save him yet. 
 He's young; he hated war; how should he die 
 When cruel old campaigners win safe through? 
 And there was silence in the summer night; 
 Silence and safety; and the veils of sleep. 
 Then, far away, the thudding of the guns.

Raven steals your name for an autumn joke:
buries you along with it under
the thickest hemlock known to chipmunks.
Too bad you were awake for the event.
He accuses you of asking all
the wrong questions over and over.
You attempt revolt to prove his medicine
wheel is cracked and filling up its own pit.

He hollers your face is unmasked and madness
has found a home. All stink and rotten fur,
he says to you, claims you had a choice
and forgot what it was. Now he says
your pain must run for the river,
the river for the wind.
He chuckles and the dark chatters, turning

1 
   ONE Day the Amarous Lisander,
   By an impatient Passion sway'd,
   Surpris'd fair Cloris, that lov'd Maid,
   Who cou'd defend her self no longer ;
   All things did with his Love conspire,
   The gilded Planet of the Day,
   In his gay Chariot, drawn by Fire,
Was now descending to the Sea,
   And left no Light to guide the World,
But what from Cloris brighter Eyes was hurl'd.

2 
   In alone Thicket, made for Love,
   Silent as yielding Maids Consent,
   She with a charming Languishment
   Permits his force, yet gently strove ?
   Her Hands his Bosom softly meet,
   But not to put him back design'd,
   Rather to draw him on inclin'd,
   Whilst he lay trembling at her feet;
   Resistance 'tis to late to shew,

3 
   Her bright Eyes sweat, and yet Severe,
   Where Love and Shame confus'dly strive,
   Fresh Vigor to Lisander give :
   And whispring softly in his Ear,
   My dearer Honour, ev'n to you,
   Or take that Life whose chiefest part
I gave you with the Conquest of my Heart.

4 
   But he as much unus'd to fear,
   As he was capable of Love,
   The blessed Minutes to improve,
   Kisses her Lips, her Neck, her Hair !
   Each touch her new Desires alarms !
   His burning trembling Hand he prest
   Upon her melting Snowy Breast,
   While she lay panting in his Arms !
   All her unguarded Beauties lie
The Spoils and Trophies of the Enemy.

5 
   And now, without Respect or Fear,
   He seeks the Objects of his Vows ;
   His Love no Modesty allows :
   By swift degrees advancing where
   His daring Hand that Alter seiz'd,
   Where Gods of Love do Sacrifice ;
   That awful Throne, that Paradise,
   Where Rage is tam'd, and Anger pleas'd ;
   That Living Fountain, from whose Trills 
The melted Soul in liquid Drops distils.

6 
   Her balmy Lips encountring his,
   Their Bodies as their Souls are joyn'd,
Where both in Transports were confin'd,
   Extend themselves upon the Moss.
Cloris half dead and breathless lay,
   Her Eyes appear'd like humid Light,
   Such as divides the Day and Night;
   Or falling Stars, whose Fires decay ;
   And now no signs of Life she shows,
But what in short-breath-sighs returns and goes.

7 
   He saw how at her length she lay,
   He saw her rising Bosom bare,
   Her loose thin Robes, through which appear
   A Shape design'd for Love and Play;
   Abandon'd by her Pride and Shame,
   She do's her softest Sweets dispence,
   Offring her Virgin-Innocence
   A Victim to Loves Sacred Flame ;
Whilst th' or'e ravish'd Shepherd lies,
Unable to perform the Sacrifice.

8 
   Ready to taste a Thousand Joys,
   Thee too transported hapless Swain,
   Found the vast Pleasure turn'd to Pain :
Pleasure, which too much Love destroys !
   The willing Garments by he laid,
   And Heav'n all open to his view ;
   Mad to possess, himself he threw
   On the defenceless lovely Maid.
   But oh ! what envious Gods conspire
To snatch his Pow'r, yet leave him the Desire !

9 
Natures support, without whose Aid 
   She can no humane Being give,
   It self now wants the Art to live,
   Faintness it slacken'd Nerves invade :
   In vain th' enraged Youth assaid
   To call his fleeting Vigour back,
   No Motion 'twill from Motion take,
   Excess of Love his Love betray'd ;
   In vain he Toils, in vain Commands,
Th' Insensible fell weeping in his Hands.

10 
   In this so Am'rous cruel strife,
   Where Love and Fate were too severe,
   The poor Lisander in Despair,
   Renounc'd his Reason with his Life.
   Now all the Brisk and Active Fire 
   That should the Nobler Part inflame,
   Unactive Frigid, Dull became,
   And left no Spark for new Desire ;
   Not all her Naked Charms cou'd move,
Or calm that Rage that had debauch'd his Love.

11 
Cloris returning from the Trance 
Which Love and soft Desire had bred,
   Her tim'rous Hand she gently laid,
   Or guided by Design or Chance,
   Upon that Fabulous Priapus,
   That Potent God (as Poets feign.)
   But never did young Shepherdess 
   (Gath'ring of Fern upon the Plain)
   More nimbly draw her Fingers back,
Finding beneath the Verdant Leaves a Snake.

12 
   Then Cloris her fair Hand withdrew,
   Finding that God of her Desires
   Disarm'd of all his pow'rful Fires,
   And cold as Flow'rs bath'd in the Morning-dew.
   Who can the Nymphs Confusion guess ?
   The Blood forsook the kinder place,
   And strew'd with Blushes all her Face,
   Which both Disdain and Shame express ;
   And from Lisanders Arms she fled,
Leaving him fainting on the gloomy Bed.

13 
   Like Lightning through the Grove she hies,
   Or Daphne from the Delphick God ;
   No Print upon the Grassie Road
   She leaves, t' instruct pursuing Eyes.
   The Wind that wanton'd in her Hair,
   And with her ruffled Garments plaid,
   Discover'd in the flying Maid
   All that the Gods e're made of Fair.
   So Venus, when her Love was Slain,
With fear and haste flew o're the fatal Plain.

14 
   The Nymphs resentments, none but I
   Can well imagin, and Condole ;
   But none can guess Lisander's Soul,
   But those who sway'd his Destiny :
   His silent Griefs, swell up to Storms,
   And not one God, his Fury spares,
   He Curst his Birth, his Fate, his Stars,
   But more the Shepherdesses Charms ;
   Whose soft bewitching influence,
Had Damn'd him to the Hell of Impotence.

a button from his shirt, a feather caught
Men came to shake his hand, or rub their warts 
upon his famous skin; young mothers held
bribes for the questions they would have him ask.
One woman, facing down a blush, gave him
a scrap of cloth, and asked that he get blood on it: 
she would return next day to pay him 
if he would care to nominate a fee ... ?
Blood of a witch! Can you believe such a thing?
I think you may be worldly after all.

Boy that I was, I can only guess 
at what he must have made of me; and he,
tricked out in a high-crowned hat, Geneva cape, 
You think us credulous? Of course you do.
So young, so quick to judge! Friend, these were days
of comets in the air, various auguries,
that we might have a witch nesting among us
was not the strangest news we heard.
Proceedings would begin at dawn, he said.
Next day we found ourselves at the chapel house
uncertain who had summoned whom.

It fell to me (though why is more than I can say:
I had not then addressed a congregation)
Old Bess had shunned society; how week on week
her vacant place in church would be remarked;
how she had made a stranger of herself
so long that when she turned to her next neighbour, 
begging a bowl of curds, she was denied;
how she cursed him for this; and how his child
sickened and died soon afterwards. I took my seat
light-headed among murmurs of approval,
part of the crowd once more, strange to myself
for all my eloquence, and some three-and-ninety

until, as civil law requires, you hear
he called it ten to one that they would find
trinkets such as beads or crucifixes
or other trumpery; meantime she must be stripped
between her secrets and the fundament)
then she must be kept from sleep and meat 
and watched most constantly.
 at first light on the third day. He seized on me
to write her testimony:

Year of Our Lord Sixteen Forty-Five,
Elizabeth Bell confessed she kept Familiars
including, but not restricted to, a Greyhound
called Vinegar Tom, a Ferret by the name
of Littleman, a Shrew called Peck-in-the-Crown,
and also a most verminous Mouse called News;
and having summoned up and suckled them
she sent her Imps to spread the Dropsy, and to kill
And freely she confessed to having met
all hugger-mugger with divers adjacent 
Witches in other Towns (we took their names)
in the Sea-marshes God have Mercy.

He took me by the arm: we stepped outside.
The magistrates were due within the hour.
might it please me to accompany him as scribe?
The wages would be modest, but I could expect
to witness many true and strange effects:
he had himself observed a Kentish woman
who mothered lambs; and once, contrariwise, 
evil rambled among us! England was plagued
and let the good news be proclaimed in smoke.

Touch a needle: watch it scent about,
quivering after its true north, uncertain,
to answer his vocation; or say he marries 
for love, so losing his inheritance: 
do such acts constitute a free election?
Look to yourself: How many decisions brought 
you to this parish, minister-to-be?
Fewer than you might care to think!
We are as we were made. But standing there
I knew chance had at last combined with choice.

That evening, waiting in the middle wood
for Alice to appear, I turned it over:
whether to sell, with scant words and poor sighs,
her dearly-bought affections; whether to leave her
There was a stand of laurel we had made
our meeting place; I had prepared some words
that balanced a worldly wish to prove myself
against my promise to make Alice my wife.
I sat, then stood and paced about, then sat
once more. Then lay and studied stalks and blades.
Then thought to pass the time by picking simples
for a posy that might sweeten our farewell;

scissor and stitch at once! I followed his swerve
north where the woods run out to open fields
I lost him. Where was Alice? I looked out
over meadows yet to be laid up for mowing,
ponds and cherry orchards. Hedgerows lined
the road I meant to climb next day. 
How paltry my equivocations seemed,
and how unmanly, how unmannerly,
to stay and parcel out over-subtle reasons,
such that I could not ask her to allow,
much less approve ... Better to leave at once. 
I met with him at dawn. We headed east.

They say there is a bird, the osprey, the fish hawk,
so majestic it can mesmerise
its prey, subduing it without a touch:
a fair example of authority.
But whether, as the book says, the firmament
Not that he had a narrow nature, not
that he made a painful study of his life;
but I marvel that his mind could entertain 
nothing but proven truths that, being few,
huddled together like beasts in a storm.

Yet he was merciful, and stood upon these points: 
that we should not accuse another soul
nor force confession from the examinate
by violence. Our methods must be nice.
if they would sit or offer to couch down
and the swimming test was only used 
at such time of the year as when none took 
a harm by it. The man was so averse
to witnessing a spectacle of pain
that when our work was done he would not suffer us
to tarry long or watch the execution;
how can you call him, as is the fashion, cruel?

Cruel. You say as much, the way you shift
and smile, and study the rugosity
your very attitude accuses us!
And still you smile. Well, I shall take your part.
You think our evidence the product of
ill-disposed constitutions, silly souls
whose fancies, working by gross fumes and vapours,
led them to believe themselves such people
as their confessions blazoned them to be;
as for the Discoverer, as for me, why,
you judge us busy men as I suppose,
troublesome fellows out for gain, or else

am I not right? Ah, child! Had you but seen
the welcome and good entertainment we received
ranging from town to town without control,
when his name ran on ahead like hope itself
pausing to wait for us at a turn in the road
a crowd of russet-coats imploring us
well. Unrecorded is not unremembered.
One night (now, were my goodwife still alive 
I would not speak of this! And this but one
example drawn from many: I tell it
in confidence that you will keep it close), 
one night, I say, a girl stole to my room.

She was, she said, with child (and showing signs),
her first, she said (as I could well believe
Into the gloom of the deep, dark night,
  With panting breath and a startled scream;
Swift as a bird in sudden flight
  Darts this creature of steel and steam.

Awful dangers are lurking nigh,
  Rocks and chasms are near the track,
But straight by the light of its great white eye
  It speeds through the shadows, dense and black.

Terrible thoughts and fierce desires
  Trouble its mad heart many an hour,
Where burn and smoulder the hidden fires,
  Coupled ever with might and power.

It hates, as a wild horse hates the rein,
  The narrow track by vale and hill;
And shrieks with a cry of startled pain,
  And longs to follow its own wild will.

I saw the garden where my aunt had died
 And her two children and a woman from next door;
 It was like a burst pod filled with clay.
 A mile away in the night I had heard the bombs
 Sing and then burst themselves between cramped houses
 With bright soft flashes and sounds like banging doors;
 The last of them crushed the four bodies into the ground,
 Over the housetop and into the street beyond.
 Now the garden lay stripped and stale; the iron shelter
 Spread out its separate petals around a smooth clay saucer.
 Small, and so tidy it seemed nobody had ever been there.
 When I saw it, the house was blown clean by blast and care.
 Relations had already torn out the new fireplaces;
 And in his office notepad that was given me
 I found solemn drawings in crayon of blondes without dresses.
 In his lifetime I had not known him well.
 These were the things I noticed at ten years of age:
 Those, and the four hearses outside our house,
 But my grandfather went home from the mortuary
 And for five years tried to share the noises in his skull,
 Then he walked out and lay under a furze-bush to die.
 When my father came back from identifying the daughter
 He asked us to remind him of her mouth.
 These were marginal people I had met only rarely
 And the end of the whole household meant that no grief was seen;
 Never have people seemed so absent from their own deaths.
 This bloody episode of four whom I could understand better dead
 Gave me something I needed to keep a long story moving;
 I had no pain of it; can find no scar even now.
 But had my belief in the fiction not been thus buoyed up
 Have realized a little what they meant, and for the first time been afraid.

like pulling a tooth with a string
and a slamming door, like taking out
an appendix by kerosene light
where dogs wandered in and out
the dirt-floored room.
Nothing for the pain that
the twisted heart they thought
they could shout back into place.

Moaning and fluttering their fleshy hands
white hats ghostly in the moonlight.

When she would not answer (though they
conjured her by heaven and by the all
mighty names they knew), they laid hands
on her and shouted down the well of her eyes.
Many tongues twisted in their mouths when
the smallest tooth of wickedness.

I have been one acquainted with the spatula, 
the slotted, scuffed, Teflon-coated spatula 

that lifts a solitary hamburger from pan to plate, 
acquainted with the vibrator known as the Pocket Rocket 

and I have gone out, a drunken bitch, 

I have. For I am a poet. And it is my job, my duty 
to know wherein lies the beauty 

of this degraded body, 

the ugly me 

on perfection, to lay my kiss 

upon the mouth of infinite wisdom. 

of God. Sundays, too, 
the soldiers get up early, and put on their fatigues in the blue- 

black day. Black milk. Black gold. Texas tea. 

Why does one month have to be the cruelest, 
can't they all be equally cruel? I have seen the best 

gamers of your generation, joysticking their M1 tanks through 
the sewage-filled streets. Whose 

world this is I think I know.

The fist clenched round my heart
loosens a little, and I gasp
brightness; but it tightens
again. When have I ever not loved
the pain of love? But this has moved

past love to mania. This has the strong
clench of the madman, this is
gripping the ledge of unreason, before
plunging howling into the abyss.

Hold hard then, heart. This way at least you live.

The fitful alternations of the rain,
When the chill wind, languid as with pain
Of its own heavy moisture, here and there
Drives through the gray and beamless atmosphere.

Because, when you were nine, your father

was murdered,
betrayed.

Because the traveler was betrayed by those with

whom he had the right to seek

Because the universe then allowed a creature

stronger, taller, more
ruthless than you

to fasten around your neck a thick wooden wheel

impossible
to throw off.

Because at nine your cunning was not equal

to iron-fastened
immense wood.

Because, stripped of what was his from birth, the slave

at ten
outwitted

because your neck
carries it still, Scarcity is the mother of being.

Hour in which betrayal and slavery
are the great teachers.

Hour in which acquisition

looks like, and for
a moment is, safety.

Hour in which the earth, looking into

a mirror, names what it sees
by the history of weapons.

Hour from which I cannot wake.

prostrate himself before

the conqueror of the world

though Alexander the Great, drunk, had

hands. The Great Khan was gracious.

had refused invitations from the King of Gold

and even the emperor of Hang-chou, now,
in his old age, he discovered he was

tired of waiting for apotheosis.

At last invited to court by the terrifying
conqueror of the world, he said Yes.

He traveled for a year and a half
following the route the Great Khan

himself had taken. He passed valley after valley

that, years later, still were filled with
ungathered, whitening bones.

He bowed his head with clasped hands.

The most powerful man on earth
then asked him to teach him the secret

the elixir
that allows men to cheat death.

Temujin was in pain. Temujin

though surrounded, all his life, by death.

Now he had fallen from a horse. The injury

had not entirely, after much
time, healed. He brooded about death, his

death. Now he must conquer the ancient

secret
that would bend

heaven to his need.

elixir.

poor far edge. In order to see the rich

debris that must lie at the bottom of the sea,

he sucked and sucked till he swallowed
the ocean.

he summoned

each. Each eloquent spokesman

praised abnegations, offered transformation, even

Best, he said, was the wife or daughter or mother of

an enemy.

each day as if hunting were the purpose of life, work

sufficient for a man. As a boy he discovered his

work when he had a wooden wheel around his neck:
to escape the wheel.

Every single thing tastes like, reeks with

the power that put it there. Weapons
keep in place

who gets rewarded how much for what. The world

is good at telling itself this is a lie. The world.

Each unit made up of

ten: ten soldiers
whose leader reports to a unit of one

hundred soldiers, whose leader reports to a unit of one
thousand soldiers, whose leader reports to a unit of

ten thousand.

With iron logic he had raised the great structure

from the flat
internecine earth

Whoever comes to shroud me, do not harm 
That subtle wreath of hair, which crowns my arm; 
The mystery, the sign, you must not touch, 
Viceroy to that, which then to heaven being gone, 
And keep these limbs, her provinces, from dissolution. 

For if the sinewy thread my brain lets fall 
Can tie those parts, and make me one of all, 
Those hairs which upward grew, and strength and art 
Can better do'it; except she meant that I 
As prisoners then are manacled, when they'are condemn'd to die. 

Whate'er she meant by'it, bury it with me, 
Love's martyr, it might breed idolatry, 
If into other hands these relics came; 
To afford to it all that a soul can do, 
That since you would have none of me, I bury some of you. 

The future is one of place
devoid of race.
A jawbone under a sock
is a geological clock.

The plunking of rain
on the termite-riddled windowpane:
reading a Bible on that ledge
is a tiny college.

(or, simply, unwilled).
The Ebola virus weeps, or retires,
because, like us, it tires.

Meanwhile, below the subbasement,
a Suede Revolution:
the phlegmatic skill of the cryptographer
soixante-huitards the teleprompter.

The id in facsimile
is suspended on a leash,
twisting in the rain
above that goddammed windowpane.

Being is slightly corrupted
(like the pun on pain)
and will never love again.

Her daughter wrote back to say my friend had died 
From time to time I'd pictured her amid strange foliage 
Why not a flock of something darkening the sky, so we would know 
For a woman from the city, this might perhaps be pigeons 
Or else a human messenger, as once when she was fabric shopping  
Garbo passed, and nodded. At Macy's years ago  
Of course she bought the cloth, but never sewed the dress 
Logic says we should make omens of our Garbos and our birds 
From the kayak, I've seen pigeons nesting underneath the pier 
where one flew into my face. I read this as a sign  
but couldn't fathom what it meant, trapped in the lag-time 

To pull the metal splinter from my palm
my father recited a story in a low voice.
I watched his lovely face and not the blade.

but hear his voice still, a well
of dark water, a prayer.
And I recall his hands,
two measures of tenderness
he laid against my face,
the flames of discipline
he raised above my head.

Had you entered that afternoon
you would have thought you saw a man
a silver tear, a tiny flame.
Had you followed that boy
you would have arrived here,

Look how I shave her thumbnail down
so carefully she feels no pain.
Watch as I lift the splinter out.
I was seven when my father
took my hand like this,
and I did not hold that shard
between my fingers and think,
Metal that will bury me,
christen it Little Assassin,
Ore Going Deep for My Heart.
And I did not lift up my wound and cry,
Death visited here!
I did what a child does
I kissed my father.

Now I begin to know at last,
 These nights when I sit down to rhyme,
 The form and measure of that vast
 God we call Poetry, he who stoops
 And leaps me through his paper hoops
 A little higher every time.
 Singing cricket or grass-hopper
 Making prodigious jumps in air
 While shaken crowds about me stare
 Aghast, and I sing, growing bolder
 Rustling the thick stands of his hair.
 He is older than the seas,
 Older than the plains and hills,
 And older than the light that spills
 He wakes the gale that tears your trees,
 He sings to you from window sills.
 At you he roars, or he will coo,
 He shouts and screams when hell is hot,
 Riding on the shell and shot.
 He smites you down, he succours you,
 And where you seek him, he is not.
 To-day I see he has two heads
 That, grim and scowling: his beard spreads
 From chin to chin: this god has power
 Immeasurable at every hour:
 He first taight lovers how to kiss,
 He brings down sunshine after shower,
 Thunder and hate are his also,
 He is YES and he is NO.
 The black beard spoke and said to me,
 Yet shout and crack your whip, be harsh!
 Hill and field, river and marsh
 Shall obey you, hop and skip
 At the terrour of your whip,
 The pale beard spoke and said in turn
 But sing and laugh and easily run
 Through the wide airs of my plain,
 Bathe in my waters, drink my sun,
 And draw my creatures with soft song;
 They shall follow you along
 Then speaking from his double head
 The glorious fearful monster said
 Black as pitch and white as snow,
 Love me, hate me, reconcile
 Hate with love, perfect with vile,
 So equal justice shall be done
 And life shared between moon and sun.
 Nature for you shall curse or smile:

Here comes the wise man in the story of sick times, 
telling you how to find the passage of satisfaction. 
He is many million years old and has been walking 
many thousand miles, more miles, more lengths of road 
than the shrunk-up earth of these days possesses, 
to find you. He has a veda from before creation 
to sing you and, lo and behold, it is about you, 
out of rough, heavy smoke, like a whale-thick hawser 
for a steamer of dead star, and pulled it through you 
from throat to crotch, from ear to ear, and hag-tied 
your hands and feet with the ends, though each of them 
has your own face molten with leprosy, 
though your brain makes the sound of crowded trains 
colliding in Kashmir and a stadium that roars hosanna, 
it is still possible now, in the next moment, to know God. 
That is, not die in confusion. But maybe, then, this guru 
asked himself clearly what happens when someone like you 
hears that a lightning-opened living fig tree or a mountain 
and a blue sky can be lived in and sets out 
on the long road never moving from his realm in pain.

Pray why are you so bare, so bare, 
And why, when I go through the shade you throw, 

My leaves were green as the best, I trow, 
But I say in the moonlight dim and weird 

I bent me down to hear his sigh;
And I trembled sore when they rode away,

They'd charged him with the old, old crime, 
Oh, why does the dog howl all night long, 

He prayed his prayer and he swore his oath, 
But the beat of hoofs smote on his ear, 

Who is it rides by night, by night, 
And what is the spur that keeps the pace, 

And now they beat at the prison door, 
We are friends of him whom you hold within, 

"From those who ride fast on our heels 
They have no care for his innocence, 

They have fooled the jailer with lying words, 
The bolts unbar, the locks are drawn, 

Now they have taken him from the jail, 
And the leader laughs low down in his throat, 

Oh, the judge, he wore a mask of black, 
And the minister, with his oldest son, 

Oh, foolish man, why weep you now? 
And the time will come when these shall dread 

I feel the rope against my bark, 
I feel in the throe of his final woe 

And never more shall leaves come forth 
I am burned with dread, I am dried and dead, 

And ever the judge rides by, rides by, 
And ever another rides his soul 

And ever the man he rides me hard, 
For I feel his curse as a haunted bough, 

And troubles, clinging in stubborn colonies

Like pulpy shore-life battened on a jetty.
They swell in the nurturing spasms of the waves,

Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing,

Lets him say, Would I had never seen her, but Oh!

Would bring less glory to your travels. Among

Romeo an extravagant speech on tears,

In the Italian manner, his teardrops cover
Inanely, and sings them to Juliet with his heart:

The almost certainly invented heart
Forever jumping and moving, like an ape.

And meaningless distinction, as Buddha says,

In 1957, singing I sit in my room

Looking out at the rain, My tear drops are
Of these illusions we make become their glory:

And becoming is destruction, but still we sing
In the shower. I do. In the beginning God drenched

Making mud cups, another cup each second

To sell the tea-seller at a penny a dozen,
And tea a penny a cup. The customers smash

Next to me: holding it awhile from out of the cloud

The risen dust alive with fire, then settled
And soaked and whirling again on the wheel that turns

And looks on the world as on another cloud,
As a passing cloud, with even Enlightenment

Itself another image, another cloud
Like an anemone that sucks at clouds and makes

A young priest saw the seraphim of the Lord:
Each had six wings, with two they covered their faces,

God sends to taunt his prophet with the truth

As the record ends, a coda in retard:
The Hearts in a shifting velvety ah, and ah
Prolonged again, and again as Lee Andrews

Reaches ah high for I have to gain Faith, Hope

Through all the music, and on into silence again.

If they have lived in a wood
It is a wood.
If they have lived on plains
It is grass rolling
Under their feet forever.

And they rise.
The soft eyes open.

Outdoing, desperately
Outdoing what is required:
The richest wood,
The deepest field.

For some of these,
It could not be the place
It is, without blood.
These hunt, as they have done,
But with claws and teeth grown perfect,

They stalk more silently,
And their descent
Upon the bright backs of their prey

May take years
Know this as their life,
Their reward: to walk

And to feel no fear,
Fulfilling themselves without pain

Under the tree,
They rise, they walk again.

Nothing but hurt left here.
Nothing but bullets and pain
and the bled-out slumping
and Jesus Christs of the wounded.
Nothing left here but the hurt.
Believe it when you see it.
Believe it when a twelve-year-old
rolls a grenade into the room.
Or when a sniper punches a hole
Believe it when four men
step from a taxicab in Mosul
to shower the street in brass
and fire. Open the hurt locker
and see what there is of knives
and teeth. Open the hurt locker and learn
how rough men come hunting for souls.

It wasn't holy so let us not praise gods.
Let us not look to them for bread,
nor the cup that changed water to wine.

Let us look to the bend of the road
that reaches. A silver blur across
the skyline, woman standing on the farm.

In her grasp, the shine that is seed,
that is beginning. She will work
the earth, bounty in the vault

of cosmos above her, heat
lightning that lassoes in its manic
current. Man never existed

but to invite danger. Loveless one.
There was once an army of men,
saluting from bayonet to bomb.

They were expert at sabotage, hand combat.
You stop the clock in your paltry chest.
The one that says choose, choose.

Wind that desired backward. Ring
the alarm. When you wake, no more
pain. A mirror like a window looking out.

What can your past now say to you
that has never been said before? What
of that clock that forbade you to move
forward. What of the clock that asked
for nothing but passage, the minutes
careening into you like a fitful arrow.
What of the clock that summoned nothing,
not even mercy. Once you tired of wanting,
a face to break, you started the clock again.

The rule-or-ruin class, in idols of the tribe,
Creates narcissine images of itself;
Defend its fetishes from the merest gibe,
Like iron captains of the Guelf.
The black-veldt god
Behold, hair kinked and flat,
A cooling mat.
The low wide nostrils ventilate
The long head in the incandescent air.
Insufferable sunrays cannot penetrate
Black tissues as the fair.
The python arm with reach to spare
Are at the beck of tribal law:
The black-veldt god is not aware
The yellow god
Behold, his mongoloid eye fold,
The color of his sod.
The cheekbones arched and bold,
The broad index of face,
The stoic mold
Herald the myth of race.
Lulled by the incense wisdom of repose,
Millenniums of candlelight,
The vegetarian god turns up his nose
At odors of the carnivorous white.
The Nordic god
Behold, his blue-gray eyes
Far-famed to conquer with a single prod
A people mazed in a hinterland of whys.
Hairy as the ape, of lip as thin,
With Mongol, one in blood, with African,
He makes a pseudo-science of his skin
And writes his autobiography Superman.
Race biases sow
Hemlocks to maim and blind,
Pile up Sinais of woe,
Jettison the freedoms of mind,
Breed the hydras of stealth,
Set kind razeeing kind,
Drink, O Fool, the bias of the tribe,
Autograph the epitaph of pain,
Press to the heart the fangs of the moccasin bribe,
Damn the soul to sodomy!
Damn the soul to death!

Five roads, the spokes of a county wheel,
Mortise the hub of our Courthouse Square:
Our graybeards fable our Daniel Boone,
Who brothered the red chiefs where
Five dark and bloody frontier paths,
Crossbones old as the skull of the moon,
Witnessed the sacrament pipe of peace,
Grim as the grin of a dead buffoon.
Out of the burial-crags of night
The felon winds hawk down;
Their devil claws riprap the roofs
That visor the town.
The stores on Main Street lean,
Tome to mummy tome;
The houses squat like smoking hulls
Half-convexed on a shoal of foam,
And glowworm windows in the deaf-dumb streets
Are greeting cards of home.
Upon the courthouse Justice stands,
Eyes fated not to see;
The town clock christens now the first-born hour
Of a day of hate to be.
Nor man nor beast prowls in his world,
But on the Courthouse Square
A statue of the Lost Cause bayonets
Contemporary air.
Outside the igloo he waited
for an invitation to come inside.
There was no knocker, no doorbell.
He coughed, there was no reply.

He crouched down and peered in.
He felt the warm air from a fire
pat his cheeks and ruffle his hair.
Hello he said quietly and repeated it.

The frost in his toes urged him in,
so did the pain in his gut. His knees
one by one welcomed the snow 
and brought him into the warmth.

He stood up and breathed deeply.
He held a foot up to the flames
then swapped it for the other foot.
He lay down on the polar bear rug

but a smell yanked him upright again
where a bowl sat with a cover on it.
He lifted this to reveal dried meat.

He grabbed a chunk and tore at it
with his teeth. It was reindeer.
He devoured all that was in the bowl
and went looking for some more.

He found none, but there was a bottle
of firewater which he swigged.
He swigged again and left it down.
He lay on the bearskin and fell asleep.

Deep in the soul there throbs the secret pain
Of one homesick for dear familiar things,
When Spring winds rock the waves of sunlit rain
And on the grass there falls the shadow of wings.

Where carven beauty mixed with madness dwells?
And men who fear to die fear not to slay,
And Life has built herself ten thousand hells.

No wave that breaks in music on the shore
Cry out aloud against the deeds of men.

Alas, the peace of these still hours and deep
Is but a dream that wanders from afar,
And the great Dreamer, turning in His sleep,
Smothers in darkness all our little star.

Yet in the gentle spirit of the wise
Light flashes out through many a simple thing,
The tired ploughman, with impassive eyes,
Knows in his heart that he was once a king.

He sees in dreams the crown long lost and dear,
A shattered gleam from some far shining sphere
Has dazed the eyes of him who drives the plough.

The long brown furrows of the broken soil
Lead in straight lines unto the sunset's gates;
On high green hills, beyond the reach of toil,
The vision of the twilight broods and waits.

The silence folded in about the heart
Whispers strange longings to the broken soul,
That lingers in a lonely place apart,
Stretching vain hands to clasp the secret whole.

Alone, unfriended, on a foreign shore,
  Behold an hapless, melancholy maid,
Begging her scanty fare from door to door,
  With piteous voice, and humbly bended head.
Alas! her native tongue is known to few:
  Her manners and her garb excite suprise;
The vulgar stare to see her bid adieu;
  Her tattered garments fix their curious eyes.
Cease, cease your laugh, ye thoughtless vain;
Behold the tear bedew her cheeks!
Imploring actions, bursting sighs,
Reveal enough to British eyes.

I have known great gold Sorrows:  
Majestic Griefs shall serve me watchfully  
Through the slow-pacing morrows:  
I have knelt hopeless where sea-echoing  
Dim endless voices cried of suffering  
Vibrant and far in broken litany:  
Where white magnolia and tuberose hauntingly  
All things most tragical, most fair,  
Have still encompassed me . . .  

I dance where in the screaming market-place  
The dusty world that watches buys and sells,  
With painted merriment upon my face,  
Whirling my bells,  
Thrusting my sad soul to its mockery. 

I have known great gold Sorrows . . .  
Shall they not mock me, these pain-haunted ones,  
If it shall make them merry, and forget  
That grief shall rise and set  
With the unchanging, unforgetting suns  
Of their relentless morrows? 

Before he put his important question to an oracle,
Croesus planned to test all the famous soothsayers,
Sending runners half around the world, to Delphi,
Dodona, Amphiarius, Branchidae, and Ammon,
So as to determine the accuracy of their words;
His challenge: not to say anything of his future

But rather what he was doing in his capital, Sardis
(Eating an unlikely meal of lamb and tortoise,
Exactly one hundred days after messengers had set out).
This posed a challenge, then, of far space not of time:
Of seeing past dunes and rock fortresses; of flying,
Freighted, above caravans and seas; of sightedness,

As it were, in the present construed as a darkened room.
Croesus of Lydia sought by this means to gauge
The unplumbed limits of what each oracle knew,
Hesitant to entrust his fate to any unable to divine
Lamb and tortoise stewing in a bronze pot.
When only the Pythia of Apollo at Delphi correctly

Answered from her cleft, her tripod just the lens
For seeing into the royal ego, she put his mind to rest,
But not before speaking in her smoke-stung voice:
I know the speech of the dumb and I hear those without voice.
We know this because those present wrote it down.

We have no word. The histories are silent.
Would sit behind me as I stared up at her impassive ceiling,
As the uptown buses slushed all the way to Harlem,
And I would recount, with many hesitations and asides,

The play I was starring in, whose Acts were as yet
Fluid, though the whole loomed tragically enough.
She would listen, bent over knitting, or occasionally note
Some fact made less random by my tremulous soliloquy.
When much later I heard of her death after long cancer,
I walked across town and stood, in front of her building,

Trying to resurrect those afternoons that became the years
We labored together toward a time without neurosis,
When I might work and raise a family and find peace.
Find, if not happiness exactly, some surcease from pain.
What question had I failed to ask, when the chance was mine?
When she, who knew me so well, could have answered?

Let just one of those quicksilver hours be returned to me,
With all that I have become a lighted room. One hour
The question of all questions, the true source and center,
Without which a soul must make do, clap hands and sing.

As if your half-witted tongue
 Spoke with an eloquence
 Death bestows, I heard your voice
 Layers of cemetery loam:
 In the shuttered half-dark, my eyes
 Soft feather-turnings. What kept me
 Separate the broiling sun
 Of intellect now shone on fiercely:
 In the sheep-pens stinking
 Of dung and lanolin,
 Swollen side and listened
 For the lamb the way
 The night sky listens
 To the synapse-fire
 Of meteors, the fibrillating
 Heartbeat of the stars.
 I heard the cells crackle
 Into being, the embryonic
 Brain begin to burn:
 Hunger. Thirst. Beneath my ear
 My own disastrous birthing,
 The umbilicus strangling
 Like a whip around my neck,
 Shoved through the momentary
 Dying revealed to me my birth,
 How half my brain went dark,
 One side of a universe
 Pinched out like a candle:
 Just smart enough to sense
 Even my death was the thrust
 Of a bewildering punchline: On Thanksgiving
 Morning mouthwatering
 Pain shoved like a spit

undetermined height in their natural state one would
reach bottom and one would fly away

being energy is its own virtue. Laws of motion teach us

Blackness than we are diffused because of our
smiles with his lips. The eyes however are the mirror of
the soul

wish we felt when we began to feel we should feel
something. Just as publicity is not production: seduction
is not seductive

the world. Black may be beautiful Professor Micheau
says but knowledge is power. Any desirable object is

If white defines Black and good defines evil then men
define women or women scientifically speaking describe
men. If sweet is the opposite of sour and heat the
absence of cold then love is the contradiction of pain and
beauty is in the eye of the beheld

you

lover

very very still the laws of motion will be in effect

that happens in gorgeous October
when the mothers are coming
in the afternoon, wearing brisk boots
and windy skirts to pick up
the little children from the day care center

Frost in the air
the maples golden and crimson
my son in a leaf pile in the playground dreaming
I am late, the playground is almost
empty, my husband will kill me

I gather my son to go home,
he forgets his sweater in the playground and I send him back
he dawdles, he is playing with leaves
in his mind, it is already a quarter
to six, will you come on I say

and hurry along the corridor, there are yellow and blue rocket
paintings, but I feel bad and ask what did you do today,
do you recognize this story, the way he stands and picks
his nose, move I say, do you want dinner or not
I wheedle, so could you please walk a little
faster, okay, I walk a little faster and get upstairs
myself, pivot on boot-heel, nobody there,
he is putting something in his mouth, his sable eyelashes
downcast, and I am swooping down the stairwell screaming

We are climbing the stairs
and I am crying, my son is not crying
I have shaken him, I have pried the sweet from his cheek
I have slapped his cheek like a woman slapping a carpet
with all my strength

The mind is a leaf pile where you can bury
anything, pain, the image of a woman
who wears a necklace of skulls, a screaming woman
you dig quickly and deposit the pulpy thing
you drop leaves on it and it stays there, that is the story

that is sticking in my mind as we push
the exit door, and run through the evening wind
to my car where I jerk the gearshift and pick
up a little speed, going along
this neat suburban avenue full of maples

There are many people who come back
After the doctor has smoothed the sheet
Around their body
And left the room to make his call.

They die but they live.

They are called the dead who lived through their deaths,
And among my people
They are considered wise and honest.

They float out of their bodies
And light on the ceiling like a moth,
Watching the efforts of everyone around them.

The voices and the images of the living
Fade away.

A roar sucks them under
The wheels of a darkness without pain.
Off in the distance
There is someone
Like a signalman swinging a lantern.

The light grows, a white flower.
It becomes very intense, like music.

They see the faces of those they loved,
The truly dead who speak kindly.

They see their father sitting in a field.
The harvest is over and his cane chair is mended.
There is a towel around his neck,
The odor of bay rum.
Then they see their mother
Standing behind him with a pair of shears.
The wind is blowing.
She is cutting his hair.

The dead have told these stories
To the living.

And in mine hert doth keep his residence, 
Into my face presseth with bold pretence 
And therein campeth, spreading his banner. 
She that me learneth to love and suffer 
Be rayned by reason, shame, and reverence, 
With his hardiness taketh displeasure. 
Wherewithall unto the hert's forest he fleeth, 
Leaving his enterprise with pain and cry, 
And there him hideth and not appeareth. 
What may I do when my master feareth 
But in the field with him to live and die? 
For good is the life ending faithfully. 

Just for a handful of silver he left us,
Found the one gift of which fortune bereft us,
    Lost all the others she lets us devote;
They, with the gold to give, doled him out silver,
    So much was theirs who so little allowed:
How all our copper had gone for his service!
We that had loved him so, followed him, honoured him,
    Lived in his mild and magnificent eye,
Learned his great language, caught his clear accents,
    Made him our pattern to live and to die!
Shakespeare was of us, Milton was for us,
He alone breaks from the van and the freemen,

    Still bidding crouch whom the rest bade aspire:
Blot out his name, then, record one lost soul more,
    One task more declined, one more footpath untrod,
One more devils'-triumph and sorrow for angels,
    One wrong more to man, one more insult to God!
Life's night begins: let him never come back to us!
    There would be doubt, hesitation and pain,
    Never glad confident morning again!
    Menace our heart ere we master his own;
Then let him receive the new knowledge and wait us,
    Pardoned in heaven, the first by the throne!

At length, by so much importunity press'd,
This stupid indiff'rence so often you blame,
Is not owing to nature, to fear, or to shame:
I am not as cold as a virgin in lead,
Nor is Sunday's sermon so strong in my head:
I know but too well how time flies along,
That we live but few years, and yet fewer are young.

But I hate to be cheated, and never will buy
Long years of repentance for moments of joy,
Oh! was there a man (but where shall I find
Good sense and good nature so equally join'd?)
Would value his pleasure, contribute to mine;
Not meanly would boast, nor would lewdly design;
Not over severe, yet not stupidly vain,
For I would have the power, tho' not give the pain.

No pedant, yet learned; no rake-helly gay,
Or laughing, because he has nothing to say;
Yet never be fond of any but me;
In public preserve the decorum that's just,
And shew in his eyes he is true to his trust;
Then rarely approach, and respectfully bow,
But not fulsomely pert, nor yet foppishly low.

But when the long hours of public are past,
And we meet with champagne and a chicken at last,
May ev'ry fond pleasure that moment endear;
Be banish'd afar both discretion and fear!
Forgetting or scorning the airs of the crowd,
He may cease to be formal, and I to be proud.
Till lost in the joy, we confess that we live,
And he may be rude, and yet I may forgive.

And that my delight may be solidly fix'd,
Let the friend and the lover be handsomely mix'd;
In whose tender bosom my soul may confide,
Whose kindness can soothe me, whose counsel can guide.
From such a dear lover as here I describe,
No danger should fright me, no millions should bribe;
But till this astonishing creature I know,
As I long have liv'd chaste, I will keep myself so.

I never will share with the wanton coquette,
Or be caught by a vain affectation of wit.
The toasters and songsters may try all their art,
But never shall enter the pass of my heart.
I loath the lewd rake, the dress'd fopling despise:
Before such pursuers the nice virgin flies:
And as Ovid has sweetly in parable told,
We harden like trees, and like rivers grow cold.

puberty at the same time, at her 
own, calm, deliberate, serious rate, 
hands, thrust out her hipbones, chant 
joins the other husks on the ground, 
7th grade, 6th grade, the 
magenta rind of 5th grade, the 
3rd grade, 2nd, the dim cocoon of 
kindergarten like a strip of thumb-suck blanket 
self, self, her throat tight and a 
two dark eyes shine 
good father who look down and 
lives their love.

"If you cut off my hands, I'll offer you my stumps."
If you knock out my teeth, I'll still go down on you, conscientiously,
If you smash my toes, employing an ice crusher, one by one,
I'll heal myself with such truancy that someday I'll run on my knees.

"If you cut off my hands, I'll offer you my stumps,"
and orchestrate a standing ovation with the memory of my hands
representing each that are dying, each that are dead,
each forgotten that we refuse to remember like the lost hands of stumps.
So much misery in plain sight like tears streaming down a face;
so much misery hidden like the eventuality of the anti-Christ;
and so much incognito like the accompanying instruments of a torch song:
like the fire in the torch itself, like the torched interior of the song.

If you cut off my ears, I will listen with my eyes
to the spitting death of cavalrymen as they're roasted over an open fire;
to the smallest bones snap, dry as sun-seasoned kindling
of the young and truant witch when she's pressed by a thousand stones;
to the brave convulsions of the communist
strapped in the electric chair, dying by degree...not unlike the commonfolk
plucked from the village, arbitrarily, one last December night,
stripped to the flesh and heaved high into the freezing air
upon a whittled stave, tall and sharp, thrust deep into the asshole
they die by degree, ever so slowly and often only
(if not by freezing first, which, if merciful, God deems)
when the wooden point finally pierces the brain, brain-dead already
from the mauve anticipation and ear-splitting prerequisite of pain.

If you cut out my tongue, I will write you a letter,
a love letter lovelorn for that taste of your tongue.
I'll plant hyacinth bulbs in an effort to replace my abolished fecundity.
I will turn eternally on my side and pull down my pants
and listen to your masturbate while fantasizing about my ass.
I'll admire the willow out the window when I hear you come
and allow as if in tribute to the times I used to participate,
a vague expression of pleasure, albeit contrived to wash across my face
the way my desire for you, real as a willow, once had done.

the moon and stars
seek some presence
in the firm quiet, in the hard lack.
A meteor falls in the empty dark.
Someone is absent, the universe is bare
listen, God, are you there?

dockleaves in the yard,
broken teeth eat sadness
in the hayless barn.
Silence knocks on men's doors
but music is heard in space.

Lichen eats the stone,
old arrogance eats peace:
female salt eats being,
angry rust eats blood.
Beetle and seal are dead,
but music is heard in space.

Weak whistle-music moves
beyond Orion's Belt,
silk threads in a cave
float in the dark.
Some player in the solitude
with a hopeful song
but destruction still goes on.

Lard made from whales,
shaving brush from badger hair,
burnt chicks are henfood.
God's lovely creatures last
there's a use for the whistler's tune.

I saw a nest ablaze,
living wood sawdust.
I saw a bird on fire
fall soundless from the air.
I saw the ancient ramparts downed
and silence in the plover field.
I saw the killer's belly feed.

A tongue hangs on a tree,
the magpies' might is right:
a noise of glossy black and white.
I heard their loud artillery.
My ears are withered leaves
from their cacophony,
the discord shuts God's eyes.
But a new musician plays
and music's heard in space.

stay alive with me until
the universe's gown,
once as fresh as cabbage-heart,
is clean again.
Do you remember mothers' milk
like pigeons' milk that feeds the flock?

I saw it last night
in the northern sky
whiter than any blood
dripped from the moon's pap
and every parched grave opened up
and the dough of milk and earth
made a bread forever fresh.

though the sky's a tambourine
danced on by an iron fool
there's harmony beyond his noise.
the dark drink waits for you
and strange music out in space.

Did you see them last night,
night's-eyes brilliant bright
in the black grass
and dandelions en masse,
guineas on velvet once
on an old god's shoulders
dead since the ancient magic passed?

Remember the age of the seed,
kingdom of creatures, power of air?
(Man was not alone,
man and his household.)
Waterfall tumbling from eldertree,
foam on pools like feather capes?
Remember pollen from grasses' ears?

Listen, father, cry no tear
for the cold eternal stones,
ruined towers, groves of graves.
Listen: a bullfinch sings sweetly
(musical anvil in forge)
his harmony's all history.

So, my father, wait a while.
There's no music after dying,
just worlds falling into suns.
Earth will be the brightest bride,
tinwhistles cracking tunes,
platform dances in each town.
Easy, father, wait a while.

But he did not wait.

One day when hope was ill
I took dangerous medicine
and hope died out and left me there,
a naked surgeon, my patient dead.
Like a hen at grips with death
my bill dumb down a well,
my plumage drowned in hate.

I turned my back on Glendarock,
walked for a drink to ease
and to obliterate
pain and fear and grief.
Rats laughed from every hedge,
in the wind a grey crow screeched.

And then I saw the sign
barley like a green fire,
sheets of barley in live waves
quivering its thousand ears,
swaying flames of green
as quietly restless as a child asleep.

I knew then no victory
would go to iron axe or spear:
our mother which art on earth
conserve us safe and clean.
Gale and 'quake knock flat

In spite of joy this peace waned
and ice ran through every vein:
all my pores were locked
and my heart turned,
a piglet on a spit, his blood steam,
panting like a dog's tongue;
the scythe taught the corn its dream.

Caterpillars squashed on the roads,
the swallow snapping back flies,
frogspawn dead in pools dried up,
the horsefly craving blood.
Prick in a vice, a man screams.
The scythe taught the poet his dream.

Barley, cover me up,
let me lie in your field.
I ask of you a green death
in the quiet milk of your stalks.
Yes, the world will survive
with neither you nor me alive.
Damn you, death, I will not then experience
just lie manure on immaculate earth.

Once a perfect standing stone,
fame engraved on my side,
my statement unambiguous,
I had nothing to hide.
But the wind of curiosity blew
with its what? and how? and why?
and blunted the edge of my dignity.

The cow of love rubbed its flank
against my sides and frost burnt:
the grain inside me shrank,
Back in those days, when he told me about his adventures

but technical details, like going rafting
 down the Colorado River; and when he wrote

was with his stepfather, the friend told him

it wasn't weird, but the best possible thing
that could have happened . . . I saw then that God,

who I never believed in, was dwelling in my heart 
as a negative: that the negative had been developed

into a picture of a man who stares up at the sky
on a day so clear he sees through the mountain's shadows

a neighbor in running shoes and sunglasses

jogging up the slope with his dog, tongue panting
 and slavering, an acute look of happiness in its eyes

that could turn at any moment into exhaustion or pain 
as in a maze of cubicles called Asshole Alley, little pyramids

of canvas called Lust of the Pharaohs, different pricing
 for what you want, depending on the equipment,

the air thick with a sour, acidic, head-fogging reek 
of come. . . . And my pal the poet, who believed

in infernal chemistry, in the spirit as a kind 
of "spooky action at a distance," he communed

with this God, this eternally dying father of all matter 
who made out of our bodies his own maze of cubicles

Asshole Alley where God's own unholy loves

and my poet pal heard the bubbling, he stirred

 that came prepared as a bride adorned for her husband . . .

hadn't yet met the coroner who wrote down

his cause of death as "polysubstance abuse"

And regardless if I believed, whenever 

those were the days when every morning God woke up 
in a blur of ecstasy and went to bed every night

in divine rage. Whoever loved him, 
he loved. Whoever hated him,

he hated back: for who can doubt the vitality 
of hate or the volatility of love.

I

Where every town was a tidy town 
and every garden a hanging garden. 
A half could be had for half a crown. 
Every major artery would harden

since every meal was a square meal. 
Every clothesline showed a line of undies 
yet no house was in dishabille. 
Every Sunday took a month of Sundays

till everyone got it off by heart
every start was a bad start
since all conclusions were foregone.

Every wood had its twist of woodbine. 
Every cliff its herd of fatalistic swine. 
Every runnel was a Rubicon.

II

Every runnel was a Rubicon 
and every annual a hardy annual 
applying itself like linen to a lawn. 
Every glove compartment held a manual

and a map of the roads, major and minor. 
Every major road had major roadworks. 
Every wishy-washy water diviner 
had stood like a bulwark

against something worth standing against. 
The smell of incense left us incensed 
at the firing of the fort.

Every heron was a presager
every resort was a last resort.

III

Every resort was a last resort
with a harbor that harbored an old grudge.
Every sale was a selling short.

from the Dandy to the Rover.
That shouting was the shouting
the weekend, I mean, we set off on an outing

with the weekday train timetable. 
Every tower was a tower of Babel 
that graced each corner of a bawn

where every lookout was a poor lookout. 
Every rill had its unflashy trout.
 Every runnel was a Rubicon.

IV

Every runnel was a Rubicon 
where every ditch was a last ditch. 
whose every pitch was another sales pitch

now every boat was a burned boat. 
Every cap was a cap in hand. 
Every coat a trailed coat. 
Every band was a gallant band

across the broken bridge
and broken ridge after broken ridge

Every straight road was a straight up speed trap. 
Every decision was a snap. 
Every cut was a cut to the quick.

V

Every cut was a cut to the quick
and Christ was somewhat impolitic

the petrol smugglers back on the old sod 
when a vendor of red diesel
for whom every rod was a green rod 
reminded one and all that the weasel

was nowhere to be found in that same quarter. 
No mere mortar could withstand a ten-inch mortar. 
Every hope was a forlorn hope.

So it was that the defenders
were taken in by their own blood splendour.
Every slope was a slippery slope. 

VI

Every slope was a slippery slope 
where every shave was a very close shave 
and money was money for old rope 
where every grave was a watery grave

now every boat was, again, a burned boat.
Every dime-a-dozen rat a dime-a-dozen drowned rat
except for the whitrack, or stoat,
which the very Norsemen had down pat

as a weasel-word
though we know their speech was rather slurred.
Every time was time in the nick

just as every nick was a nick in time.
Every unsheathed sword was somehow sheathed in rime.
Every cut was a cut to the quick. 

VII

Every cut was a cut to the quick 
what with every feather a feather to ruffle. 
Every whitrack was a whitterick. 
Everyone was in a right kerfuffle

when from his hob some hobbledehoy 
would venture the whitterick was a curlew. 
Every wall was a wall of Troy 
and every hunt a hunt in the purlieu

of a demesne so out of bounds
every hound might have been a hellhound.
At every lane end stood a milk churn

whose every dent was a sign of indenture 
to some pig wormer or cattle drencher. 
Every point was a point of no return.

VIII

Every point was a point of no return
for those who had signed the Covenant in blood.
Every fern was a maidenhair fern
that gave every eye an eyeful of mud

ere it was plucked out and cast into the flame. 
Every rowan was a mountain ash. 
Every swath-swathed mower made of his graft a game 
and the hay sash

went to the kemper best fit to kemp. 
Every secretary was a temp 
who could shift shape

like the river goddesses Banna and Boann.
Every two-a-penny maze was, at its heart, Minoan. 
Every escape was a narrow escape.

IX

Every escape was a narrow escape 
where every stroke was a broad stroke 
of an ax on a pig nape. 
Every pig was a pig in a poke

though it scooted once through the Diamond
The threshold of pain was outlimened
by the bar raised at high tea

now every scone was a drop scone.
that might itself drop from grin to girn.

Every malt was a single malt. 
Every pillar was a pillar of salt. 
Every point was a point of no return.

X

Every point was a point of no return
where to make a mark was to overstep the mark.
Every brae had its own braw burn.
Every meadow had its meadowlark

that stood in for the laverock.
Those Norse had tried fjord after fjord
to find a tight wee place to dock.
When he made a scourge of small whin cords,

Christ drove out the moneylenders
and all the other bitter-enders
when the thing to have done was take up the slack.

Whin was to furze as furze was to gorse.
Every hobbledehoy had his hobbledyhobbyhorse.
Every track was an inside track. 

XI

Every track was an inside track 
where every horse had the horse sense 
to know it was only a glorified hack. 
Every graineen of gratitude was immense

and every platitude a familiar platitude.
Every kemple of hay was a kemple tossed in the air
by a haymaker in a hay feud.
Every chair at the barn dance a musical chair

given how every paltry poltroon 
and his paltry dog could carry a tune 
yet no one would carry the can

any more than Samson would carry the temple. 
Every spinal column was a collapsing stemple. 
Every flash was a flash in the pan.

XII

Every flash was a flash in the pan
and every border a herbaceous border
unless it happened to be an
herbaceous border as observed by the Recorder

or recorded by the Observer.
Every widdie stemmed from a willow bole.
Every fervor was a religious fervor

Every pit was a bottomless pit
out of which every pig needed a piggyback.

Every cow had subsided in its subsidy.
Biddy winked at Paddy and Paddy winked at Biddy.
Every track was an inside track.

XIII

Every track was an inside track 
and every job an inside job. 
Every whitterick had been a whitrack 
until, from his hobbledehob,

that hobbledehobbledehoy 
had insisted the whitterick was a curlew. 

for whom every dance was a last dance
and every chance a last chance
and every letdown a terrible letdown

from the days when every list was a laundry list 
in that old country where, we reminisced, 
every town was a tidy town.

1.

After the sweet promise,
I come to this white office, its sterile sheet,
its hard tablet, its stirrups, to hold my breath
while I, who must, allow the glove its oily rape,
to hear the almost mighty doctor over me equate
my ills with hers
and decide to operate.

It grew in her
as simply as a child would grow,
as simply as she housed me once, fat and female.
Always my most gentle house before that embryo
of evil spread in her shelter and she grew frail.
Frail, we say, remembering fear, that face we wear
in the room of the special smells of dying, fear
where the snoring mouth gapes
and is not dear.

There was snow everywhere.
Each day I grueled through
its sloppy peak, its blue-struck days, my boots
slapping into the hospital halls, past the retinue
of nurses at the desk, to murmur in cahoots
with hers outside her door, to enter with the outside
air stuck on my skin, to enter smelling her pride,
her upkeep, and to lie
as all who love have lied.

No reason to be afraid,
my almost mighty doctor reasons.
must come in seasons,
thinking that living is worth buying.
I walk out, scuffing a raw leaf,
kicking the clumps of dead straw
Automatically I get in my car,
knowing the historic thief
is loose in my house
and must be set upon.

2.

I lie smooth from breast to leg.
All that was special, all that was rare
is common here. Fact: death too is in the egg.
Fact: the body is dumb, the body is meat.
And tomorrow the O.R. Only the summer was sweet.

The rooms down the hall are calling
all night long, while the night outside
sucks at the trees. I hear limbs falling
and see yellow eyes flick in the rain. Wide eyed
and still whole I turn in my bin like a shorn lamb.

The walls color in a wash
of daylight until the room takes its objects
into itself again. I smoke furtively and squash
the butt and hide it with my watch and other effects.
The halls bustle with legs. I smile at the nurse
who smiles for the morning shift. Day is worse.

Scheduled late, I cannot drink
or eat, except for yellow pills
and a jigger of water. I wait and think
until she brings two mysterious needles: the skills
But nothing is sure. No one. I wait in doubt.

I wait like a kennel of dogs
jumping against their fence. At ten
she returns, laughs and catalogues
my resistance to drugs. On the stretcher, citizen
and boss of my own body still, I glide down the halls
and rise in the iron cage toward science and pitfalls.

The great green people stand
over me; I roll on the table
under a terrible sun, following their command
to curl, head touching knee if I am able.
Next, I am hung up like a saddle and they begin.
Pale as an angel I float out over my own skin.

I soar in hostile air
over the pure women in labor,
over the crowning heads of babies being born.
I plunge down the backstair
calling mother at the dying door,
to rush back to my own skin, tied where it was torn.
Its nerves pull like wires
snapping from the leg to the rib.
Strangers, their faces rolling lilke hoops, require
my arm. I am lifted into my aluminum crib.

3.

Skull flat, here in my harness,
thick with shock, I call mother
to help myself, call toe to frog,
that woolly bat, that tongue of dog;
call God help and all the rest.
The soul that swam the furious water
sinks now in flies and the brain
flops like a docked fish and the eyes
are flat boat decks riding out the pain.

My nurses, those starchy ghosts,
hover over me for my lame hours
and my lame days. The mechanics
of the body pump for their tricks.
I rest on their needles, am dosed
and snoring amid the orange flowers
and the eyes of visitors. I wear,
like some senile woman, a scarlet
candy package ribbon in my hair.

Four days from home I lurk on my
mechanical parapet with two pillows
at my elbows, as soft as praying cushions.
My knees work with the bed that runs
on power. I grumble to forget the lie
I ought to hear, but don't. God knows
recalling mother, the sound of her
good morning, the odor of orange and jam.

I lounge in frills or, picturesque,
I wear bunny pink slippers in the hall.
I read a new book and shuffle past the desk
to mail the author my first fan letter.
Time now to pack this humpty-dumpty
back the frightened way she came
and run along, Anne, and run along now,
my stomach laced like a football
for the game.

Nothing to tell why I cannot write 
in re Nobody; nobody to narrate this 
latter acknowledgement: the self that counts 
words to a line, accountable survivor 
pain-wedged, pinioned in the cleft trunk, 
less petty than a sprite, poisonous as Ariel 
to Prospero's own knowledge. In my room 
to describe them, as if for evidence 
on which a life depends. Except for the eyes 
they are threadbare, the threads hanging 
as from a luminate tough weed in February. 
omega, fossiled in an Indian shawl; 
like a shaved cross section of living tissue, 
the edge metallic blue, the core of jet, 
the white of the eye in fact closer to beige, 
the whole encircled with a black-fringed green. 
at the garden end, in blustery twilight 
his lambent cloak stark as a warlock's cape, 
the maharajah-bird that scavenges 
close by the stone-troughed, stone-terraced, stone-ensurfed 
Suffolk shoreline; at times displays his scream.

Was on a blue, bright day like a blemish in this landscape.
And Charlotte who is frail and the youngest of us collects
Sticks and branches to start our fires, cries as they burn
Because they resemble most what she has lost
Or has little of: long fingers, her toes,
And a left arm gone past the elbow, soon clear to her shoulder.
She has the mouth of sea perch. Five of our sisters wear
Green hoods. You are touched by all of this, but not by us.
To be touched by us, to be kissed! Sometimes
We see couples rowing in the distance in yellow coats.

Sometimes they fish with handlines; we offend
Everyone who is offended most
And by everything and everyone. The five goats love us, though,
And live in our dark houses. When they are
Full with milk they climb the steps and beg that
They be milked. Their teats brush the steps and leave thick
Yellow trails of fresh milk. We are all females here.
Even the ghosts. We must wash, of course, in salt water,
But it smarts or maybe even hurts us. Often with a rope
Around her waist Anne is lowered entirely into the water.
She splashes around and screams in pain. Her screams
Sometimes carry clear to the beaches on the Cape.

For us I say so often. For us we say. For us! We are
Human and not individual, we hold everything in common.
We are individual, you could pick us out in a crowd.
You did. This island is not our prison. We are not kept
In; not even by our skin.

Once Anne said she would love to be a Negro or a trout.

You all this; but be proud for I am living, and yet each day
I am less and less your flesh. Someday, eventually, you
Should only think of me as being a lightning bug on the lawn,
Or the Negro fishing at the pond, or the fat trout he wraps

hate the people of this village  
and would nail our hats 
to our heads for refusing in their presence to remove them 
or staple our hands to our foreheads  
for refusing to salute them 
if we did not hurt them first: mail them packages of rats, 
mix their flour at night with broken glass. 
We do this, they do that. 
We devein one of their sisters. 
The quicksand pits they built were good. 
Our amputation teams were better. 
We trained some birds to steal their wheat. 
They sent to us exploding ambassadors of peace. 
They do this, we do that. 
We canceled our sheep imports.  
They no longer bought our blankets.  
We mocked their greatest poet  
and when that had no effect  
we parodied the way they dance 
which did cause pain, so they, in turn, said our God 
was leprous, hairless. 
We do this, they do that. 
Ten thousand (10,000) years, ten thousand 
(10,000) brutal, beautiful years.

Who is your lady of love, O ye that pass 
Singing? and is it for sorrow of that which was 
For hands she hath none, nor eyes, nor lips, nor golden 

And when she bids die he shall surely die. 
And he shall leave all things under the sky 

For if in the inward soul she hath no place, 
In vain they cry unto her, seeking her face, 

For on your brows is written a mortal sentence, 
Nor have the sure sweet common love, nor keep 
Friends and safe days, nor joy of life nor sleep. 

But if the old world with all the old irons rent 
Laugh and give thanks, shall we be not content? 

Shall be a part of the earth and the ancient sea, 
But somewhat in it of our blood once shed 
Shall quiver and quicken, as now in us the dead 

Ye are foolish that put off the fair soft present, 
And the old live love that was shall be as ye, 
Dust, and no fruit of loving life shall be. 

Lo, the dead mouths of the awful grey-grown ages, 
Laugh, knowing how many as ye now say have said, 
How many, and all are fallen, are fallen and dead: 

Seeing night by night devoured of day by day, 
And surely more than all things sleep were sweet, 

Is this so sure where all men's hopes are hollow. 
Not therefore were the whole world's high hope rootless; 

For what light think ye after life to see? 
That all men born are mortal, but not man: 

Remembering Ann
Whose beauty began
At the crown of her head
And ran to the deep underneath
Now, half mad with pain, 
She crawls through her rooms,
Calling for doctors,
Falling,
Forgetting,
Consumed,
Trepanned.

Star fall
Nightfall
Bomb fall
Downfall...
Read the scan:
Every woman and every man,
Once a flowered Palestine,
Bald catastrophe,
According to the
Plan.

Thus far, O Friend! have we, though leaving much 
Unvisited, endeavour'd to retrace 
My life through its first years, and measured back 
The way I travell'd when I first began 
To love the woods and fields; the passion yet 
Was in its birth, sustain'd, as might befal, 
By nourishment that came unsought, for still, 
From week to week, from month to month, we liv'd 
A round of tumult: duly were our games 
Prolong'd in summer till the day-light fail'd; 
No chair remain'd before the doors, the bench 
And threshold steps were empty; fast asleep 
The Labourer, and the old Man who had sate, 
A later lingerer, yet the revelry 
Continued, and the loud uproar: at last, 
When all the ground was dark, and the huge clouds 
Were edged with twinkling stars, to bed we went, 
With weary joints, and with a beating mind. 
Ah! is there one who ever has been young, 
Nor needs a monitory voice to tame 
The pride of virtue, and of intellect? 
And is there one, the wisest and the best 
Of all mankind, who does not sometimes wish 
For things which cannot be, who would not give, 
If so he might, to duty and to truth 
The eagerness of infantine desire? 
A tranquillizing spirit presses now 
On my corporeal frame: so wide appears 
The vacancy between me and those days, 
Which yet have such self-presence in my mind 
That, sometimes, when I think of them, I seem 
Two consciousnesses, conscious of myself 
And of some other Being. A grey Stone 
Of native rock, left midway in the Square 
Of our small market Village, was the home 
And centre of these joys, and when, return'd 
After long absence, thither I repair'd, 
I found that it was split, and gone to build 
A smart Assembly-room that perk'd and flar'd 
With wash and rough-cast elbowing the ground 
Which had been ours. But let the fiddle scream, 
And be ye happy! yet, my Friends! I know 
That more than one of you will think with me 
Of those soft starry nights, and that old Dame 
From whom the stone was nam'd who there had sate 
And watch'd her Table with its huckster's wares 
Assiduous, thro' the length of sixty years. 

With giddy motion. But the time approach'd 
That brought with it a regular desire 
For calmer pleasures, when the beauteous forms 
Of Nature were collaterally attach'd 
To every scheme of holiday delight, 
And every boyish sport, less grateful else, 
And languidly pursued. 

It was the pastime of our afternoons 
To beat along the plain of Windermere 
With rival oars, and the selected bourne 
Was now an Island musical with birds 
That sang for ever; now a Sister Isle 
Beneath the oaks' umbrageous covert, sown 
With lillies of the valley, like a field; 
And now a third small Island where remain'd 
An old stone Table, and a moulder'd Cave, 
A Hermit's history. In such a race, 
So ended, disappointment could be none, 
Uneasiness, or pain, or jealousy: 
We rested in the shade, all pleas'd alike, 
Conquer'd and Conqueror. Thus the pride of strength, 
And the vain-glory of superior skill 
Were interfus'd with objects which subdu'd 
And temper'd them, and gradually produc'd 
A quiet independence of the heart. 
And to my Friend, who knows me, I may add, 
Unapprehensive of reproof, that hence 
Ensu'd a diffidence and modesty, 
And I was taught to feel, perhaps too much, 
The self-sufficing power of solitude. 

More than we wish'd we knew the blessing then 
Of vigorous hunger, for our daily meals 
Were frugal, Sabine fare! and then, exclude 
A little weekly stipend, and we lived 
Through three divisions of the quarter'd year 
In pennyless poverty. But now, to School 
Return'd, from the half-yearly holidays, 
We came with purses more profusely fill'd, 
Allowance which abundantly suffic'd 
To gratify the palate with repasts 
More costly than the Dame of whom I spake, 
That ancient Woman, and her board supplied. 
Hence inroads into distant Vales, and long 
Excursions far away among the hills, 
Hence rustic dinners on the cool green ground, 
Or in the woods, or near a river side, 
Or by some shady fountain, while soft airs 
Among the leaves were stirring, and the sun 
Unfelt, shone sweetly round us in our joy. 

How twice in the long length of those half-years 
We from our funds, perhaps, with bolder hand 
Drew largely, anxious for one day, at least, 
To feel the motion of the galloping Steed; 
And with the good old Inn-keeper, in truth, 
On such occasion sometimes we employ'd 
Sly subterfuge; for the intended bound 
Of the day's journey was too distant far 
For any cautious man, a Structure famed 
Beyond its neighbourhood, the antique Walls 
Of that large Abbey which within the vale 
Of Nightshade, to St. Mary's honour built, 
Stands yet, a mouldering Pile, with fractured Arch, 
Belfry, and Images, and living Trees, 
A holy Scene! along the smooth green turf 
Our Horses grazed: to more than inland peace 
Left by the sea wind passing overhead 
(Though wind of roughest temper) trees and towers 
May in that Valley oftentimes be seen, 
Both silent and both motionless alike; 
Such is the shelter that is there, and such 
The safeguard for repose and quietness. 

With whip and spur we by the Chauntry flew 
In uncouth race, and left the cross-legg'd Knight, 
And the stone-Abbot, and that single Wren 
Which one day sang so sweetly in the Nave 
Of the old Church, that, though from recent showers 
The earth was comfortless, and, touch'd by faint 
Internal breezes, sobbings of the place, 
And respirations, from the roofless walls 
The shuddering ivy dripp'd large drops, yet still, 
So sweetly 'mid the gloom the invisible Bird 
Sang to itself, that there I could have made 
My dwelling-place, and liv'd for ever there 
To hear such music. Through the Walls we flew 
And down the valley, and a circuit made 
In wantonness of heart, through rough and smooth 
We scamper'd homeward. Oh! ye Rocks and Streams, 
And that still Spirit of the evening air! 
Even in this joyous time I sometimes felt 
Your presence, when with slacken'd step we breath'd 
Along the sides of the steep hills, or when, 
Lighted by gleams of moonlight from the sea, 
We beat with thundering hoofs the level sand. 

Above the crescent of a pleasant Bay, 
There stood an Inn, no homely-featured Shed, 
Brother of the surrounding Cottages, 
But 'twas a splendid place, the door beset 
With Chaises, Grooms, and Liveries, and within 
Decanters, Glasses, and the blood-red Wine. 
In ancient times, or ere the Hall was built 
On the large Island, had this Dwelling been 
More worthy of a Poet's love, a Hut, 
Proud of its one bright fire, and sycamore shade. 
But though the rhymes were gone which once inscribed 
The threshold, and large golden characters 
On the blue-frosted Signboard had usurp'd 
The place of the old Lion, in contempt 
And mockery of the rustic painter's hand, 
Yet to this hour the spot to me is dear 
With all its foolish pomp. The garden lay 
Upon a slope surmounted by the plain 
Of a small Bowling-green; beneath us stood 
A grove; with gleams of water through the trees 
And over the tree-tops; nor did we want 
Refreshment, strawberries and mellow cream. 
And there, through half an afternoon, we play'd 
On the smooth platform, and the shouts we sent 
Made all the mountains ring. But ere the fall 
Of night, when in our pinnace we return'd 
Over the dusky Lake, and to the beach 
Of some small Island steer'd our course with one, 
The Minstrel of our troop, and left him there, 
And row'd off gently, while he blew his flute 
Alone upon the rock; Oh! then the calm 
And dead still water lay upon my mind 
Even with a weight of pleasure, and the sky 
Never before so beautiful, sank down 
Into my heart, and held me like a dream. 

And thus the common range of visible things 
Grew dear to me: already I began 
To love the sun, a Boy I lov'd the sun, 
Not as I since have lov'd him, as a pledge 
And surety of our earthly life, a light 
Which while we view we feel we are alive; 
But, for this cause, that I had seen him lay 
His beauty on the morning hills, had seen 
The western mountain touch his setting orb, 
In many a thoughtless hour, when, from excess 
Of happiness, my blood appear'd to flow 
With its own pleasure, and I breath'd with joy. 

[Let a be taken as . . .]
a liquid line beneath the skin
and b where the blue tiles meet
a seeming road here, endless

rain pearling light
chamber after chamber
of dust-weighted air
the project of seeing things
so to speak, or things seen

namely a hand, namely
the logic of the hand
holding a bell or clouded lens
the vase perched impossibly near the edge
obscuring the metal tines.

I stood there torn
felt hat in hand
wondering what I had done
to cause this dizziness

It reveals no identifiable source
(not anyway the same as a forest floor).
A vagrant march time, car
passes silently, arm rests at his side

holding a bell or ground lens
how that body would
too abstract &/or not abstract enough

but a closed curve in either case
she might repeat
indicating the shallow eaves
nothing but coats and scarves below the window
his-her face canted to the left

nothing imagined or imaginable
dark and nothing actually begun
so that the color becomes exactly as it was
in the miniuscule word for it
scribbled beside an arrow

on the far wall
perfectly how else continuous with memory.
There are pomegranates on the table
though they have been placed there
salt, pepper, books and schedules

all sharing the same error
and measure of inattention.
What she says rolls forward.
I shouted toward motion, other gestured,
child laughs, sky,

traffic, photograph. I
gave a real pain, expelled
breath, decided. Both arms in thought,
mirror otherwise, abandoned
structures mostly, the glass

door with its inscription lay open
before us, nothing to fear.

I strolled up old Bonanza, where I staked in ninety-eight, 
I kept thinking mighty sadly of the funny ways of Fate, 

I strolled up old Bonanza. The same old moon looked down; 
But the cabins all were silent, and the flat, once like a town, 
There were piles and piles of tailings where we toiled with pick and pan, 
And there a giant gold-ship of the very newest plan 

It wallowed in its water-bed; it burrowed, heaved and swung; 
Its bill of fare was rock and sand; the tailings were its dung; 
Full fifty buckets crammed its maw; it bellowed out for more; 
With two to feed its sateless greed, it worked for seven score, 

The idle windlass turns to rust; the sagging sluice-box falls; 
Your little sod-roofed cabins with the snugly moss-chinked walls 
The battle-field is silent where of old you fought it out; 

The solitary seeker with his grub-stake on his back, 
On the mesas of the Southland, on the tundras of the North, 

It was my dream that made it good, my dream that made me go 

I hear the hoarse stampeding of an army on my trail, 

Beyond the shark-tooth ranges sawing savage at the sky 
You seek the last lone frontier, far beyond your frontiers now, 

You will find a tattered tent-pole with a ragged robe below it; 

The broken boulders by the road
Shall not commemorate my ruin.
Regret shall be the gravel under foot.
I shall watch for
Slim birds swift of wing
That go where wind and ranks of thunder
Drive the wild processionals of rain.

The dust of the travelled road
Shall touch my hands and face.

They've flown south now 
 and one Great Egret fishes the pond 
 as broad-winged hawks begin their migrations, 
 kenneling on thermal currents of wind 
 off above yellowing mountains. 
 Now, snakeweed blooms along the trail choking 
 white and purple asters. A few bleeding 
 leaves fall amidst wilting greenery. Poison 
 Ivy turns red with warning. 
 My eighty-three-year-old mother still argues 
 with my father, twelve years dead. Their hatred 
 reverberates in a back room 
 of my head, rattling memories of my lonely childhood. 
 Their loathing for each other 
 colors all my days with pain. I loved him 
 because he loved me best, but I look like her, 
 my face and spirit tear at each other. 
 Am I the child of hate? 
 A wounded love sprouts like a weed 
 from watery depths, uncultivated, 
 flowers, white and purple, bloom, 
 Beyond winter, 

Life swiftly treading over endless space;
And, at her foot-print, but a bygone pace,
The ocean-past, which, with increasing wave,
On the dead waters of that passionless sea,
Silence hung over it, and drowsy Death,
Like a gorged sea-bird, slept with folded wings
That wore the thin grey surface, like a veil
Over the calmness of their features pale.

And there were spring-faced cherubs that did sleep
Like water-lilies on that motionless deep,
How beautiful! with bright unruffled hair
On sleek unfretted brows, and eyes that were
Buried in marble tombs, a pale eclipse!
And smile-bedimpled cheeks, and pleasant lips,
Meekly apart, as if the soul intense
Spake out in dreams of its own innocence:
And so they lay in loveliness, and kept
With very envy of their happy fronts;
Of glossy locks with hollow eyes forlorn,

So lay they garmented in torpid light,
Under the pall of a transparent night,
Slept, as he sleeps upon the silent face
Of a dark dial in a sunless place.

It is not that I love you less
Than when before your feet I lay,
But to prevent the sad increase
Of hopeless love, I keep away.

In vain (alas!) for everything
Which I have known belong to you,
Your form does to my fancy bring,
And makes my old wounds bleed anew.

Who in the spring from the new sun
Already has a fever got,
Too late begins those shafts to shun,

Too late he would the pain assuage,
And to thick shadows does retire;
About with him he bears the rage,
And in his tainted blood the fire.

For if I break, you may distrust
The vow I made to love you, too.

One spring day I saw
the shadow of a strawberry tree
lying on the moor
like a shy lamb asleep.

Its heart was far away,
suspended in the sky,
brown in a brown veil,

The shadow played in the wind,
moving there alone
to make the tree content.
Here and there it shone.

It knew no pain, no haste,
wanting only to feel morning,
then noon, then the slow-paced
journey of evening.

Among all the shadows always 
joining eternal shadow,
shrouding the earth in falseness,
I loved this steady shadow.

And thus, at times, it descends
among us, this meek semblance, 
and lies down, as if drained,
in grass and in patience.

Heard you that shriek? It rose 

Saw you the sad, imploring eye? 
As if a storm of agony 

She is a mother pale with fear, 
And in her kyrtle vainly tries 

He is not hers, although she bore 
He is not hers, although her blood 

He is not hers, for cruel hands 
The only wreath of household love 

His love has been a joyous light 
A fountain gushing ever new, 

His lightest word has been a tone 

They tear him from her circling arms,
Oh! never more may her sad eyes

No marvel, then, these bitter shrieks
She is a mother, and her heart

The spirit is too blunt an instrument
to have made this baby.
Nothing so unskilful as human passions
could have managed the intricate
exacting particulars: the tiny
blind bones with their manipulating tendons,
the knee and the knucklebones, the resilient
fine meshings of ganglia and vertebrae,
the chain of the difficult spine.

Observe the distinct eyelashes and sharp crescent
fingernails, the shell-like complexity
of the ear, with its firm involutions
concentric in miniature to minute
ossicles. Imagine the
infinitesimal capillaries, the flawless connections
of the lungs, the invisible neural filaments
through which the completed body
already answers to the brain.

Then name any passion or sentiment
possessed of the simplest accuracy.
No, no desire or affection could have done
with practice what habit
has done perfectly, indifferently,
through the body's ignorant precision.
It is left to the vagaries of the mind to invent
love and despair and anxiety
and their pain.

Cabbages, beans and bell peppers vie 
for the glossy centerfold of Nature's Hand 

where this month the vulgar Hubbard squash 
reclines with succotash of questionable origin. 

I've grown to prize passivity; I've learned the word 

vegetabilis, and vegetare which means "to animate, to grow," 
though I can think of half a dozen ways to squander 

an afternoon as Destry Rides Again, Dietrich and Stewart...
and my doctor friend Lenny who calls to tell me 

that broccoli has a nervous system, that it suffers 
when you pick it. If form follows function, 

cauliflower, coral and raspberry clumps, the florets that sizzle 

in my spiced tahini. I've heard potatoes 
described as "thuggy and plotless," but never "aristocratic" 

as it says on page seven's "The Stately Spud," 
where tubers possess an enviable pedigree, 

popular back to 4000 b.c. when Incas made urns 

long reds, round reds and Yukon Golds, 

Don't get me wrong. I'm all for ambition, 
but some days I'd rather steep in my own kettle. 

Give me chamomile, cowboys, cornelian cherries. 
Let me sink, once again, into purposeless sleep.

Possessed of this city, we are born
Into kinship with its people.
Eyes that looked upon
Cool magnificence of space,
The calm of marble,
And green converging on green
In long distances,
Bear their wonder to refute
Meaningless dimensions,
The Old-World facades.

The city is ours irrevocably
As pain sprouts at the edge of joy,
As grief grows large with our years.
New seeds push hard to topsoil;
Logic is a grafted flower
From roots in a changeless bed.
Skeleton steel may shadow the path,
Broken stone snag the foot,
But we shall walk again
Side by side with others on the street,
Each certain of his way home.

No day is right for the apocalypse, 
if you ask a housewife in Talking 
Rock, Georgia, or maybe Hop River, 
Connecticut. She is opening a plastic bag. 
A grotesque parody of the primeval muck 
starts oozing out. And behold, 
the plastic bag is magic; 
there is no closing it. Soap 
in unsoftened water, sewage, asbestos 
coiled like vermicelli, Masonite shavings, 
a liquefied lifetime subscription 
to The New York Times delivered all at once. 
Empty body stockings, limp, forlorn, 
like collapsed lungs. A blithering slur  
of face creams, an army of photocopies  
travelling on its stomach of acronyms,  
tooth paste tubes wrung rigid and dry.  
Also, two hundred and one tons 
of crumpled bumpers wrapped in insurance  
claims, slag, coal dust, plastic trimmings,  
industrial excrementa. Lake Erie is returning  
our gifts. 

something. Now it slithers through the house,  
out windows, down the street, spreading  
everywhere but heading, mostly, west.  
Maybe heading is the wrong word, 
implying shape and choice. It took 
the shape of the landscape 
it rippled across like the last blanket. 
And it went west because the way lay open  
once again: not the same fecund rug 
the earth grew when white people scraped  
their first paths to the Pacific 
across the waves of the inland grasses. 

Outside Ravenswood, West Virginia,  
abandoned cars shine in the sun 
like beetlebacks. The ore it took 
to make the iron it took to make the steel  
it took to make the cars, that ore 
would remember the glaciers if it could.  
The amiable cars wait stilly in their pasture.  
Three Edsels forage in the southeast corner  
like bishops of a ruined church. 
There are Fords and Dodges, a Mercury  
on blocks, four Darts and a Pierce Arrow, 
a choir of silenced Chevrolets. 
And, showing their lapsed trademarks  
and proud grilles to a new westward  
expansion, two Hudsons, a LaSalle 
and a DeSoto. 

rust, a faded purple like the dusty 
skin of a Concord grape, flaking moss- 
green paint with primer peeking  
blandly through, the garish macho reds  
insurance companies punish, the greys  
(opaque) and silvers (bright), the snob colors  
(e.g. British Racing Green), the two-tone  
combinations time will spurn like roadkill 
(1957: pink and grey), cornflower 
blue, naval blue, royal blue, stark blue, true 
blue, the blacker blue the diver sees 
but now they are all covered, 
rolling and churning in the last 
accident, like bubbles in lava. 

above the river, the lawn that drained 
toward Ricwood Ave. like a small valley of uncles, 
the sultry river musk that slid 
and indeed all Cincinnati seethes. The vats 
at Proctor & Gamble cease their slick 
congealing, and my beloved birthplace 
is but another whorl of dirt. 

Up north near Lebanon and Troy and Rosewood, 
the corn I skulked in as a boy 
lays back its ears like a shamed dog.  
The Holstein pivots his massive head 
toward where the barn stood; the spreading stain 
he sees is his new owner. 

What we imagined was the fire-storm, 
or, failing that, the glacier. 
losing only California. 
With the seismologists and mystics 
we say the last California ridge 
crumble into the ocean. 

And we were read with elegies: 

O California, sportswear 
and defense contracts, gasses that induce 
deference, high school girls 
with their own cars, we wanted 
to love you without pain. 

O California, when you were moored to us 
like a vast splinter of melon, 
like a huge and garish gondola, 
then we were happier, although 
we showed it by easy contempt. 
But now you are lost at sea, 
your cargo of mudslides and Chardonnays 
lost, the prints of the old movies 
lost, the thick unlighted candles of the redwoods 
snuffed in advance. On the ocean floor 
they lie like hands of a broken clock. 

O California, here we come, 
quoting Ecclesiastes, 
ruinous with self-knowledge. 

for lamentation, Kansas succumbs. 
Drawn down by anklets of DDT, 
the jayhawk circles lower and lower  
while the sludge moils and crests. 

Now we are about to lose our voices 
we remember that tomorrow is our echo.  
O the old songs, the good days: 
bad faith and civil disobedience, 
sloppy scholarship and tooth decay.  
Now the age of footnotes is ours. 
Ibid, ibid, ibid, ibid, ibid. 

While the rivers thickened and fish  
rose like vomit, the students of water  
stamped each fish with its death date.  
they thought, though it went by  
of water flecked by a confetti  
of topsoil, clucked tongues, smug  
prayers. What we paid too much for  
and too little attention to, 
our very lives, all jumbled 
now and far too big in aggregate  
to understand or mourn, goes by, 
and all our eloquence places its 
weight on the spare word goodbye.

I sit in my sorrow a-weary, alone; 
And dark in my spirit and dark in my chamber. 

I sit and list to the steps in the street, 
And the winds at my shutter they blow and beat; 

I list to the steps as they come and go, 
And my heart sinks down so low, so low; 

I think of the ships that are out at sea, 
Not one of the ships beareth news to me, 

I think of all things in the world that are sad; 
Of prisons, of dungeons, of men that are mad; 

I think of a dear little sun-lighted head, 
And crazed with the cruelest pain went to bed 

The footsteps grow faint and more faint in the snow; 

I see at the window just over the street, 
Her red mouth is smiling, her news is so sweet; 

She has finished the letter, and folding it, kisses, 
And now in the hearth-light she softly undresses: 

And now as she stoops to the ribbon that fastens 
And now, as she patters in bare feet, she hastens 

The lavendered linen updrawn, the round arm 
Revealing the exquisite outline of form; 

I see the small hand lying over the heart, 
The fair little fingers they tremble and part, 

Hark! midnight! the winds and the snows blow and beat; 
Thank God for the window just over the street; 

It was the week of asking. Asking
to watch her eat. Asking if she understood
to explain the difference between
wanting to die right now, and dying later.
The tumor making certain answers
unquestionable. I watched her point
to the incense dish from which
someone swept all the ashes up. Asking
if she recognized us. Because that
is what the living want: thinking
it is a sign we have been loved.
But the answer was a summer drive,
a mountain, piles of leaves beneath which
a wolf slept, suckling her cubs.
Some deaths are good
and it makes them hard to grieve.
She was, at times, in great pain. We wanted her
to die, too. That was important. But first
we wanted her to remember.
From the bed, a finger pressed
into a pile of leaves. Gray haunch,
their tableau, she told us. And drifted off. And
we did not know the meaning behind this.
The wolves must have looked so comfortable
to her: wordless and in this wordlessness
perfect. Did she want to go there, too.
I could point to the image and say, my father
must be in there, my uncle. Or:
the wolf is you, you are still the mother,
as if necessary to name that self
at the end of its world. An animal cry,
memory. That was our selfishness.
As death was hers. She insisted upon it.
And why not. It was good for me
to get a chance to know you,
she said, who had known me
my entire life. Then the pills, a small
handful, crushed into juice.
She was happy then. We all were. Or
said we were. What
is the difference now.

The world had fled, with all its silly cares
and questionable aches, and in one swoon
we rose above its stupefying airs
like flying lovesick pigs up to the moon.

The world returned, and this was a surprise
I raged against like someone on a rack,
telling the sun, tears clouding my stunned eyes,
give us our splendid isolation back.

The world came back and stayed, pain never ended,
but when the aches and cares begged for a hand,
I finally began to understand

The song the stars of morning sung 

And prayer is made, and praise is given, 
The ocean looketh up to heaven, 

Its waves are kneeling on the strand, 
Their white locks bowing to the sand, 

They pour their glittering treasures forth, 
And all the listening hills of earth 

The green earth sends its incense up 
From folded leaf and dewy cup 

The mists above the morning rills 
The altar-curtains of the hills 

The winds with hymns of praise are loud, 
The thunder-organ of the cloud, 

With drooping head and branches crossed 
Or speaks with tongues of Pentecost 

The music of its starry march 

So Nature keeps the reverent frame 
And all her signs and voices shame 

The sky has been dark
for many years.
My skin has become as damp
and pale as rice paper
and feels the way
parched it out there in the fields.

my hands react as if
I had just touched something
hot enough to burn.
tingles with migraine. Mother
when the pain flares up.

This morning
her breathing was graveled,
She was in a good humor,
floating in the milky water
like two walruses,
in my mouth, thinking:
six children and an old man
have sucked from these brown nipples.

I was almost tender
when I came to the blue bruises
that freckle her body,
for thirty years. I soaped her slowly,
she sighed deeply, her eyes closed.
It seems it has always
been like this: the two of us
in this sunless room,
the splashing of the bathwater.

In the afternoons
when she has rested,
garnished with a shred of gingered fish,
a slice of pickled turnip,
We eat in the familiar silence.
As I toast to her health
with the tea she has poured,
a thousand cranes curtain the window,
fly up in a sudden breeze.

Desire will not save the morality of God.
If he created beings able to choose between good and evil,
And they chose, and the world lies in iniquity,
Nevertheless, there is pain, and the undeserved torture of creatures,
Which would find its explanation only by assuming
The existence of an archetypal Paradise
And a pre-human downfall so grave
That the world of matter received its shape from diabolic power.

Panic attacks your pain-porous skin?  
Imagine the layers of onion, Sufi-circling  
and circling until there is no tear-making body.  
dark spirit-flight, or anhedonia, running from  
fleshy erection, and the pumpkins, earth goddesses  
For social phobia, desensitize among the rows  
Too much affect: meditate on potatoes, taciturn  
as overturned stones. Too little: visualize the hanging  
From the lettuce there is common sense for narcissism:  
acceptance as side dish, garnish for a meaty sandwich.  
people shovel and level, rake and make wishful with seed,  
the soil that wants for nothing and yields and yields.

There are black guards slamming cell gates
on black men,
with numbers on their backs,
to red inmates as they walk by to chow and cells.

convicts marching in straight lines, guards flying
on badged wings, permits to sting, to glut themselves
at the cost of secluding themselves from their people . .
wrapped in gunnysacks that insulate the pipes
carrying the pale weak water to their hearts.

carrying buckets of blood out of cells,
see them puking at the smell, the people,
their own people slashing their wrists,
hanging themselves with belts from light outlets;
it gets bad to see them clean up the mess,
carry the blue cold body out under sheets,
and then retake their places in guard cages,
watching their people maul and mangle themselves,

the sun shines, the guards talk of horses and guns,
go to the store and buy new boots,
and the longer they work here the more powerful they become,
taking on the presence of some ancient mummy,
down in the dungeons of prison, a mummy
that will not listen, but has a strange power
in this dark world, to be so utterly disgusting in ignorance,
and yet so proudly command so many men. . . .

they become cobras sucking life out of their brothers,
they fight for rings and money and drugs,
in this pit of pain their teeth bare fangs,
to fight for what morsels they can. . . .

of nothing but their born color, guilty of being innocent,
they slowly turn to dust in the nightly winds here,
flying in the wind back to their farms and cities.
From the gash in their hearts, sand flies up spraying
over houses and through trees,

you are looking at them.

My doctor's packed the place for years
because he's known for making huge things
sometimes disappear. His routine is predictable,
effortless. Pick a number, any number: he's pointing
to his framed pain scale. He pauses for effect.
at a magic show gone wrong. Onstage in Vegas
once, the rare white tiger snapped. Inexplicable:
my numbers creeping up each week. My doctor
backs out quickly, as if dragged off in some beast's jaws.

In the beginning we could hear their swords cutting jewels 
From the protected orchard while our children heard fine teeth 
Dragging along empty granary floors. Between us and them 
Stands the great wound, swallowing all tears, all voices. 

Transfixed or transformed by this pain? We never know because 
Who can slip through the gate without throwing a shadow 
All we've wished upon them a thousand times, still they inch 

Back and taunt us with their persistence. We track them down 
To a quick end. More come. And the old memories grow new. 
The future seems already written with a pen of iron. The book 
Unreadable, immense. The enemy has become our masterpiece.

the courage of miles we traversed in the dark, on a sighing speedboat,

through jungles that spat only shoes, calzones, bodies twisted

we priested our mornings with sun-dried sombreros, communed
with our ghosts & had no wish to sacrifice our bellies, our terneros,

mystify Bengay on the mouths of our map-torn feet, pay no heed

we knew our shadows had crumbed the anesthetic vultures.
They pressed their loaded beaks upon our backs until our knees bent

sour orange. One asked if we served the enemy, but we took enemy
to mean a seed that sits quietly underfoot, abashed to vestibule

the grating sun. Blindfolded, we faced the gloom volcanoes

in their tortured independence: bloody thunder in the brown-starched
symphonies, a wind that howled & shoved its thumbs through feral lands

probing for judgment or commiseration. Chingado god that copycatted
these legs from monotony. Chingado god that hewed our wrists,

a pair of stems to strap behind our wrested boots & jeans. Whoever

of the braids in the phrasings of our dreams before we vanished. Pat

siphoning forecasts with our fingers roving on the table? Or caught
your chests pain-leavened & stilled them with the rumpus of our hopes?

Though that men do call it dotage,
Who loveth not wanteth courage;

And whosoever may love get,
From Venus sure he must it fet

Or else from her which is her heir,
And she to him must seem most fair.

With eye and mind doth both agree.
There is no boot: there must it be.

The eye doth look and represent,
But mind afformeth with full consent.

Thus am I fixed without grudge:
Mine eye with heart doth me so judge.

Love maintaineth all noble courage.
Who love disdaineth is all of the village:

It were pity they should obtain,

For often times where they do sue
They hinder lovers that would be true.

For whoso loveth should love but once.
Change whoso will, I will be none.

And should you thousand ages try
The life you've taken to supply,
You could not do it.

You surely must have been devoid
Of thought and sense, to have destroy'd
You'll one day rue it.

Twas but a fly perhaps you'll say,
That's born in April, dies in May;
That does but just learn to display
His wings one minute,

And in the next is vanish'd quite.
Or come a cold blast in the night,
There's no breath in it.

And Providence, whose power endu'd
That fly with life, when it thinks good,
May justly take it.

A life by Nature made so short,
Less reason is that you for sport
Should shorter make it.

But, Robert do not estimate
A creature's pain by small or great;
The greatest being

Can have but fibres, nerves, and flesh,
And these the smallest ones possess,
Although their frame and structure less
Escape our seeing.

A person is very self-conscious about his head. 
It makes one nervous just to know it is cast 
In enduring materials, and that when the real one is dead  
The cast one, if nobody drops it or melts it down, will last. 

We pay more attention to the front end, where the face is,  
Than to the interesting and involute interior: 
The Fissure of Rolando and such queer places 
Are parks for the passions and fears and mild hysteria. 

The things that go on there! Erotic movies are shown  
To anyone not accompanied by an adult. 
The marquee out front maintains a superior tone:  
Documentaries on Sharks and The Japanese Tea Cult. 

The fronts of some heads are extravagantly pretty.  
These are the females. Men sometimes blow their tops  
About them, launch triremes, sack a whole city.  
The female head is mounted on rococo props. 

Judgment is in the head somewhere; it keeps sums  
Of pleasure and pain and gives belated warning;  
This is the first place everybody comes 
With bills, complaints, writs, summons, in the morning. 

This particular head, to my certain knowledge 
Has been taught to read and write, make love and money,  
Operate cars and airplanes, teach in a college,  
And tell involved jokes, some few extremely funny. 

It was further taught to know and to eschew  
Error and sin, which it does erratically. 
This is the place the soul calls home just now.  
One dislikes it of course: it is the seat of Me.

I hate the travel logs that tell you
 more about the pain than the place,
 yet here I am again, narrating
 the same old story to myself
 time after time. The papers circling
 in an alley, watched by a hunchback,
 mimic my plans and their preventer;
 when an old man treats the drycleaner
 to a lengthy sermon on spotting,
 I collect it; bloated clouds spell
 messages that people stopped hearing
 long ago, and as for the hag
 who runs at me, arms open, mouth bleeding?
 Always I head out, hot for details,
 and always the details start revolving
 innocent hands in wicked bonfires.
 I could never go for ten minutes
 without seeing fissures as faces,
 and I confess a hopeless weakness
 for the types who come back from travels,
 gather their fans around and tell them
 stories of order or of wonder:
 seashores and meadows sometimes get so
 promising outings are becoming
 meta-walks and mechanized phrases:
 how it blared back echoes of me,
 Meanwhile forces of good and evil
 squirm and flourish under the carpet,
 out for scenes of horror and pleasure,
 to the return of that enormous,
 fertile ground between shouting and silence.

They shake their heads, still, after the dinner

Falls into streets that are already slushy.

Too strange to believe,
Or as a beast does, stunned by a blow.

It is at once to leap, a creamy swan,

To be practical, the deep to persevere.

A movie theater lobby in front of them
Swiftly emptying a bucket of water:

Then a closed pharmacy.

A recollection of purity, a clean
Handkerchief each man feels in his own pocket,
Perturbs them, slows their pace down. Now they have seen

A yellow stain on a pile of old snow
The resistance. The falling flakes, falling

The snow grows heavier, falls on their stooping shoulders.

Mamua, when our laughter ends, 
And hearts and bodies, brown as white, 
Are dust about the doors of friends, 
Or scent ablowing down the night, 
Then, oh! then, the wise agree, 
Comes our immortality. 
Mamua, there waits a land 
Hard for us to understand. 
Out of time, beyond the sun, 
All are one in Paradise, 
You and Pupure are one, 
There the Eternals are, and there 
The Good, the Lovely, and the True, 
And Types, whose earthly copies were 
The foolish broken things we knew; 
There is the Face, whose ghosts we are; 
The real, the never-setting Star; 
And the Flower, of which we love 
Faint and fading shadows here; 
Never a tear, but only Grief; 
Dance, but not the limbs that move; 
Songs in Song shall disappear; 
Instead of lovers, Love shall be; 
For hearts, Immutability; 
And there, on the Ideal Reef, 
Thunders the Everlasting Sea! 

Shall home to the Eternal Brain. 
And all lovely things, they say, 
Meet in Loveliness again; 
And the hands of Matua, 
Stars and sunlight there shall meet 
And white birds in the dark ravine, 
And flamboyants ablaze at night, 
And dawns of pearl and gold and red, 
Mamua, your lovelier head! 
Under the ferns, of crumbling stuff, 
Eyes of illusion, mouth that seems, 
All time-entangled human love. 
Divinely down the scented shade, 
Where feet to Ambulation fade, 
And moons are lost in endless Day. 
How shall we wind these wreaths of ours, 
Where there are neither heads nor flowers? 
The palms, and sunlight, and the south; 
When our mouths are one with Mouth.... 

Crown the hair, and come away! 
Hear the calling of the moon, 
And the whispering scents that stray 
About the idle warm lagoon. 
Hasten, hand in human hand, 
Down the dark, the flowered way, 
Along the whiteness of the sand, 
Wash the mind of foolishness, 
Mamua, until the day. 
Spend the glittering moonlight there 
Pursuing down the soundless deep 
Limbs that gleam and shadowy hair, 
Or floating lazy, half-asleep. 
Dive and double and follow after, 
Snare in flowers, and kiss, and call, 
With lips that fade, and human laughter 
And faces individual, 
Well this side of Paradise! .... 

I think it moves. And we move with it. And keep moving.

No one knows time better than they. Always and forever.

Our family. Mama, me, Angie, Gilbert, Earl, Louise.
Kids. Daddy working in Skull Valley for the AT&SF RY.
Mama just packed us up in New Mexico and moved us. 

Suddenly. A surprise. To me anyway. To join Daddy.
Who was away most of the time. Arizona. California.
Sometimes Colorado. Sometimes Texas. Always away.

Railroad work, labor, heavy machinery. Rails and sun.
Trains always moving. I remember the war. The 1940s.
Soldiers. Tanks. Cannons with huge guns and wheels.

It moves. And we move with it. Though for boys, maybe?
I wanted to wait. So things could happen more gently. 

A boy misses his father. A boy watches younger sisters.
And he misses the times his mother is happy, laughing.

Who knows time as well as boys and their young worries?
I was a boy growing within a family, community. And dreams.
And girls. Girl teenagers. I adored them, their pretty ways.

In the fourth grade at McCartys. Made a bookshelf in shop.
Proudly. Sanded. Varnished. Shiny. For my Mama.
With love. I wanted to be a good carpenter like my Dad.

Dad drank though. Dark moods. Dark scary times. Danger.
And words hurtful, abrasive, accusing. Anger, pain, scorn.
A boy wonders. About time. About forever. When it ends.

I loved my Dad. Wonderful. Skilled man. Artist, singer.
Precious and assuring. Yet. Yet. Unpredictable moments.
You can never tell about time either. Like that, it is. It is.

We farmed. Corn, melons, chili, beets, carrots, cilantro.
Onions. Even potatoes in little mounds but they died.
Corn fields at night. Irrigating. June nights. I loved forever.

My grandpa I loved very much. Time was soothing then.
And with him they were. A healer and respected kiva elder.

Herded his sheep. Along with my uncle Estevan. And Roy.
Roy was a strange one. Chinese manner. So people said.
From Chinatown in California. He had a gentle soft smile.

And a storyteller he was. Yes. About his horse. Lightning.
Yes, ride to see his girl to call her outside. Estella! Estella!

And because mothers are always loving. Alert. Ever caring.
Mama decided we must go to Skull Valley where Dad was.
Up to Grants, the depot there, we got on the westbound train.

Sacks and boxes, a trunk, suitcase or two. Clothes, things.
We never had much. Poor. And lonely for Dad always away.

Father gone. Mother and kids left behind. Is it like that?

The slave rules. The company. Trains powerful, unending.
Time I thought was in the trains. Fast, loud, dangerous. 

Soldiers, army troop trains, going east and going west.
Unending. I wondered where they were all going. Where?

Lightning and thunder trapped in the train power and steel. 
Yet I yearned for blue song. Hollow and lonely long tone.
Coming round the bend, and something beyond the horizon. 

Far away maybe. Travel. Some other dream. Youth. Yes.
I liked songs. Music I heard on the radio. Hank Williams.
And stories that rang through the air. Talk and listening.

It was the first time ever we were leaving the reservation.
Only one world till then it seemed. Acoma community. Ours.
On the edge of another world though, something strange. 

And fearful too. The dark moments. Like when Daddy drank.
When there was fire from another world. An unknown.
Yet fascinating somehow, oddly, something on the far horizon.

Like riding thunder. The horse, Lightning, Roy talked about.
Riding off somewhere into the dark night. Fast, fast. Fast.

Riding toward night. We watched the land speeding away.
Far across the land, along the edge of it was a highway.
With cars and trucks. Moving, moving. Only slower.

Time speeds, like you speed. Only not an awareness.
Or any way to tell what is taking place. When young.

Youth is not the time when time is apparent. Too slow.

At Ashfork we got off the train onto the depot platform.
I sensed being lost. Lost mother and lost children. Dusk. 
Where was this world? Where did home go? Children?

Lost at the edge of a strange world with a gray green depot.
Large letters painted. Little sister is hungry. She whimpers.

It could be Indians. A family, mother and children. Lost?
Where are they going? Up the street I think. Looking.
For something to eat. My mother held only a little money.

Hamburgers we split. Water and water. Self-conscious.
Moment is time. I looked out and saw a train passing.

Wait. Then a train down Chino Valley. Long-distance night.
Stars vanished in too much night. Long day into night.
Where does time go? Does it go nowhere but into night?

Then at the sudden edge. The horizon. A vast bowl of light.
And only at the far end, trees. And still far ahead of us. 
The train engine light. Always a light showing the way.

My brother and I excited. A deer stunned by train light. 
Stilled. Stark. A cut stone. The dazzling moment held us.
Youth and time. Nothing like it. Thrilled. Never until then.

Years later I tried to tell about that moment to a love.
The horizon and beyond. Full of stars. Even unseen.

Always belief is firmer than faith. With and without dreams.
We arrived in Skull Valley early in the morning. Three-thirty?
Where were we? On the other side of the moon from Acoma.

A mother and her children and assorted bags and boxes.
Dreams. Time. Horizon. Farther from home than belief. 

A train depot on the other side of the moon. Deserted. 
After the train pulled away. Only the rails and starshine.

With a visor. Sitting at a tall wooden desk with shelves.
And a metal puzzle thing making clicking-clacking noises.

Who spoke with Mama. Who smiled. Who wondered at us. 
An Indian woman with Indian children. Who were strangers.
Like we just came from the planet Acoma. The other side.

Of day. Of the present early morning night in that moment.
The telegrapher with the visor said. I think. I think he did.
He knew my father. Knew where he lived. Two miles away.

So we took a road. Early, early morning night trek. Time.
Shimmers in an odd amazing way. Within what might be.
A boy and a story. The dawn coming. Horizon ever so near.

When we knocked on his railroad worker housing door.
Daddy was shocked. In his underwear. Shadows upon.

We come to discover each other. All failures and gains. 
Counting and mattering, no matter the time or sequence.

Once again together. Family, history, travel, time, love.
To say what time is, even fifty years in the past to now.
In this moment, Skull Valley is just as real as it ever was.

Memory we cross and cross again. Treks, trauma, and on.
We do know what time is. It is loss and gain. A lingering.
Within discovery we come to ourselves. Finding. Destiny.

Moments recalled like friends. It was that way or another.

Skull Valley. A time for a boy. History engulfed beyond.
When I went back. Recently. I ate with friends at the cafe.
By the railroad track. I was fascinated by photographs.

Of the mountain lions in the mountains nearby. Ever there.
No matter what. And the stories of bones. Tall tales or truths.

Our history is more than here. We know more than realize.
Stalk us, just like they found. A boy. More than fifty years ago. 

He discovered a world beyond Acoma. A world apart.
And a world together as time, memory, as story. As his own.
We seek and are found. Secure. Actual. Safe. And serene.

Last summer near Prescott that boy fifty vast years later.
Found carved images on stone walls that fit his hands.
Carved in time. Eternal as stone. Past and present. Ever.

Highlight Actions
Enable or disable annotations

No eye may see, no mind may grasp 

This brain, which now alternate throbs 

This curious frame of human mould, 
This brain, and heart, and wondrous form 

The leaping blood will stop its flow; 
Lay bloomless, and the liquid tongue 

The grave will take me; earth will close 
But where, O, Nature, where shall be 

O, powerless is this struggling brain 
In dark, uncertain awe it waits 
Rough music in the lane,
the love child lapped in blood
and safe at her breast, the pain
echoed in wood on wood,
steel on steel, as they come,
the women in their blacks,
to hound her from house and home,
bands of bitches and claques
of crones with their pots and pans,
their hooks and ladles and bowls,
to beat outside in the street,
to stand at her window and howl,
while the child takes a taste of green
is all she has of her own
and the music goes on and on.

Dear Emily, my tears would burn your page, 
Burning my eyes, my fingers, while I turn 
Singly the words that crease my heart with age. 
If I could make some tortured pilgrimage 
Through words or Time or the blank pain of Doom 
And kneel before you as you found your tomb, 
Then I might rise to face my heritage. 

Yours was an empty upland solitude 
Bleached to the powder of a dying name; 
That faded as the fading footsteps came 
To trace an epilogue to words grown odd 
In that hard argument which led to God.

How will you
cut off from Zions,
What if you
cut off from hymns

Cut off from Scripture

Godsave your unsuspecting fists
grasping the fiery ladder bare,
your forehead
fighting a wordless solitaire.

Without some future language
how can I ask you?
If I could ask in Euphorese,
Moonskrit, in Ecolow....

in the dust
I fear my after-thirst.

You are blind like us. Your hurt no man designed,
And no man claimed the conquest of your land.
But gropers both through fields of thought confined
We stumble and we do not understand.
You only saw your future bigly planned,
And we, the tapering paths of our own mind,
And in each other's dearest ways we stand,
And hiss and hate. And the blind fight the blind.

When it is peace, then we may view again
With new-won eyes each other's truer form
And wonder. Grown more loving-kind and warm
We'll grasp firm hands and laugh at the old pain,
When it is peace. But until peace, the storm
The darkness and the thunder and the rain.
The wind, that beats the mountain, blows
    More softly round the open wold,
And gently comes the world to those
    That are cast in gentle mould.

And me this knowledge bolder made,
    Or else I had not dare to flow
In these words toward you, and invade
    Even with a verse your holy woe.

'Tis strange that those we lean on most,
    Those in whose laps our limbs are nursed,
Fall into shadow, soonest lost:
    Those we love first are taken first.

God gives us love. Something to love
    He lends us; but, when love is grown
To ripeness, that on which it throve
    Falls off, and love is left alone.

This is the curse of time. Alas!
    In grief I am not all unlearn'd;
Once thro' mine own doors Death did pass;
    One went, who never hath return'd.

    Once more. Two years his chair is seen
Empty before us. That was he
    Without whose life I had not been.

Your loss is rarer; for this star
    Rose with you thro' a little arc
Of heaven, nor having wander'd far
    Shot on the sudden into dark.

I knew your brother: his mute dust
    I honour and his living worth:
A man more pure and bold and just
    Was never born into the earth.

I have not look'd upon you nigh,
    Since that dear soul hath fall'n asleep.
Great nature is more wise than I:
    I will not tell you not to weep.

And tho' mine own eyes fill with dew,
    Drawn from the spirit thro' the brain,
I will not even preach to you,
    "Weep, weeping dulls the inward pain."

Let Grief be her own mistress still.
    She loveth her own anguish deep
More than much pleasure. Let her will

I will not say "God's ordinance
    Of death is blown in every wind;"
For that is not a common chance
    That takes away a noble mind.

His memory long will live alone
    In all our hearts, as mournful light
That broods above the fallen sun,
    And dwells in heaven half the night.

Vain solace! Memory standing near
    Cast down her eyes, and in her throat
Her voice seem'd distant, and a tear
    Dropt on the letters as I wrote.

I wrote I know not what. In truth,
    How should I soothe you anyway,
Who miss the brother of your youth?
    Yet something I did wish to say:

For he too was a friend to me:
    Both are my friends, and my true breast
Bleedeth for both: yet it may be
    That only silence suiteth best.

Words weaker than your grief would make
    Grief more. 'Twere better I should cease;
Although myself could almost take
    The place of him that sleeps in peace.

Sleep sweetly, tender heart, in peace;
    Sleep, holy spirit, blessed soul,
While the stars burn, the moons increase,
    And the great ages onward roll.

Sleep till the end, true soul and sweet.
    Nothing comes to thee new or strange,
Sleep full of rest from head to feet:
    Lie still, dry dust, secure of change.

My Love? alas! I must not call you Mine,
I must forget your lovely melting Charms,
And be for ever Banisht from your Arms:
For ever? oh! the Horror of that Sound!
It gives my bleeding Heart a deadly wound:
While I might hope, although my Hope was vain,
But now your Hymen doth all Hope exclude,
And but to think is Sin; yet you intrude
On every Thought; if I but close my Eyes,
Methinks your pleasing Form besides me lies;
With every Sigh I gently breath your Name,
And never mingled with a warm Desire:
All I have now to ask of Bounteous Heaven,
Is, that your Perjuries may be forgiven:
That she who you have with your Nuptials blest,
That all our Joys may light on you alone,
Then I can be contented to have none:
Than now and then, to cast a Thought on Me:
And, Madam, though the Conquest you have won,
Over my Strephon, has my hopes undone;
Kinder to You, than he has been to Me.

You change a life
as eating an artichoke changes the taste
of whatever is eaten after.
and what of you a cat possesses is essential but narrow:
to know if the distance between two things can be leapt.
The piano, that good servant,
has none of you in her at all, she lends herself
to what asks; this has been my ambition as well.
Yet a person who has you is like an iron spigot
whose water comes from far-off mountain springs.
Inexhaustible, your confident pronouncements flow,
coldly delicious.
not judgment. Teeth pass. Pain passes.
the serene judgments of evolution or the judgment
and it burns. And if a small tear swells the corner
of one eye, it is only the smoke, it is no more to him than a beetle
fleeing the flames of the village with her six-legged children.
judged beetles especially loved by God,
I have seen you carry a fate to its end as softly as a retriever
carries the quail. Yet however much
I admire you at such moments, I cannot love you:
you are too much in me, weighing without pity your own worth.
When I have erased you from me entirely,
disrobed of your measuring adjectives,
stripped from my shoulders and hips each of your nouns,
then perhaps I will love you. Helpless to not.
As a newborn wolf is helpless: no choice but hunt the wolf milk,
find it sweet.

 Take back that Heart, you with such Caution give, 

 I care not how the busy Market goes, 
 Love does one Staple Rate on all impose, 

 An humble Slave the Buyer must become, 

 I must no friendly Smile or Kiss impart; 
 And every Hour still more unjust you grow,
 Without Controul she gazes on that Face,
 From me she Ravishes those silent hours,
 Whilst I in vain accuse the angry Powers,
Adrastes Ears with that dear Voice are blest,
 And with those Love-Inchanting Touches prest:
 She has thee all: whilst I with silent Greif,
 Whilst like a Glimering Taper still I burn,
Adraste takes the welcome rich Return:

 Be just, my lovely Swain, and do not take
 Or give Amynta so much Freedom back:
 Let us then love upon the honest Square,

Oft have I thrilled at deeds of high emprise,
And yearned to venture into realms unknown,
Thrice blessed she, I deemed, whom God had shown
Of foreign shores, could vision half the throne
Full gained by her, whose power fully grown
So would I be this woman whom the world
Avows its benefactor; nobler far,
In the alembic forged her shafts and hurled
At pain, diseases, waging a humane war;
Greater than this achievement, none, I ween.

You give me a little courage, Mary,
in your skittish dedication to her highness;
I too can dare as humbleness may dare;
at the wordy Anglo-Saxon periphery
the syllables I managed to memorize
before they were weighted down by meaning?
inherent in my ancient holy tongue.
I miss my amen sela, hallelujah
going for the full linguistic bait-and-switch
in the move from one language to another:
a tour-de-force of formal contrivance
(no form repeated more than once
in each of a hundred fifty psalms!)
in your show-off/virtuoso hands.
but what else is there in dreary England?
Its sole extravagance a trove of synonyms
that endlessly perplexes and expands
a language, frankly, crying out for poetry
given its absence, even, of integrity
not to mention intrinsic song. . . .
(Its sound: water going down the drain
according to my friend, an Italian,
after riding in a compartment of Americans
gurgling all the way from Florence to Rome.)
Why not a convoluted scheme
of intricately wrought meter and rhyme?
So what if the Hebrew has no strict patterns?
Aim for a parallel sublime;
had you known how daunting their task was;
you had no Hebrew, used the Coverdale,
Wyatt, Geneva Bible, as cribs for Latin,
Clearly, your secret weapon was ignorance,
also useful (look at me!) in writing a poem,
your psalms fourth- and fifth-hand half the time.
Unless (of course!) your stroke of brilliance
was to focus on the one thing you could do:
Sing and let your song be new
which they are, profoundly, even to me,
who know so many bits of the originals
put off and spellbound by your art-
ifice, when my wary eye suddenly falls
on something both completely known and new,
for a brief instant alien with grace,
a black-on-white typescript mirage
in which English letters turn into Hebrew
or at least intercept its holiness. . . .
How did you manage it, Mary?
What motivated you was love of poetry,
or rather of your legendary
your whole life working to immortalize. . . .
exists in English poetry than his . . .
a touch you often managed to approach
in your grief-induced lyric resolve
to force a bit of him to stay alive.
and there he is, with you, all the time,
clearly palpable in all your artistry.
It was your eagerness to be with him
that kept you going back to intervene
with yet one more indomitable line,
got you through all hundred-fifty psalms.
(poetry often thrives on self-delusion)
to trick yourself to rise to his occasion. . . .
Unless he just provided the excuse
to stake your own (quite vast) poetic claims,
impossible to say from this vantage point:
to distinguish collaborator from muse,
self-doubt from false humility
Who will contradict me if I confuse
of misapprehension, class, religion
reinforcing our dissociation
(Jew from Christian, commoner from countess,
twenty-first-century from seventeenth)
come together in passion upon passion
(forgive me, Mary, if dare too far):
psalms, poetic forms, your genius brother
(I mean both the poet and the man;
no poem could manufacture that much charm).
my version, albeit, fairly mild,
though I too was admonished as a child
about what a woman dared not do.
Still, I have a vast cohort, while you
were almost entirely alone.
(published just a year before I was born);
while you had to ransack antiquity
for even fragments of poems by a woman.
you might even have relished your position
your precocious niece, Mary (later Wroth).
And who can really estimate the damage
required to turn you into poet?
Of course, in your time, death was everywhere.
to shore up an attenuated heart
against even further disrepair,
immersion in the psalms a sort of antidote
from living with a sad, disfigured mother
(small-pox scars from nursing a sick queen)
your only daughters, Katherine, then Anne.
God made this day; he did us send it
In joy and mirth then let us spend it
And maybe it does, when you can summon
all that air or life enfold
to distract you with a binge of exaltation . . .
or if that fails, then an assiduous
extravaganza of sublime detail
calibrated to provide the wherewithal
to face a universe we cannot alter
if not with joy and mirth, at least with grace:
a perfect, hand-illuminated psalter,
to a voice alternately humble, bold,
beseeching, thankful, ecstatic, bleak,
through which (hallelujah, Mary!) you still speak.

What crowding thoughts around me wake,
What marvels in a Christmas-cake!
Ah say, what strange enchantment dwells
Enclosed within its odorous cells?
Is there no small magician bound
Encrusted in its snowy round?
For magic surely lurks in this,
A cake that tells of vanished bliss;
A cake that conjures up to view
The early scenes, when life was new;
When memory knew no sorrows past,
Mysterious cake, whose folds contain
That speaks of friends for ever fled,
And wakes the tears I love to shed.
Oft shall I breathe her cherished name
From whose fair hand the offering came:
For she recalls the artless smile
Of nymphs that deck my native isle;
Of beauty that we love to trace,
Allied with tender, modest grace;
Of those who, while abroad they roam,
Retain each charm that gladdens home,
And whose dear friendships can impart
A Christmas banquet for the heart!

One against the other across
the fleetingly infinite field:
that dry crackling of pallid
corn stalks clacking comes close to it.
behind them mountains range like steppes
between the tiers of fog they coddle.
it's autumn coming close
again and you need to compare
this one to autumns past, recall the other
sputters of color too good to last.
something you need to say, something
you come close to:
especially in fall when it cleans
wind in possession of you
says it best. but you go on anyway,
trying to pen the breeze:
this fall phenomenon different
from summer's in its macabre
celebration of the lifeless,
in its forever rewritten memory
of what comes next. sorrel
leaves swirling in a whirlwind
mimic your own compulsive
repetition, its own circle
of yearning so close
to a kind of comfort.
quickening conversations
of geese flocking south
chill through your thin skin:
behind it a choir of silence
undefined rows you
closer to what you'll never forget,
what you almost remember
this time. closer to its name.
the heart overtaken. the bare staves
waving at boughs' ends, the musical
red wings: something
they almost say, more like a sense
hunched in darkness, an ache,
a suspicion: every time,
closer to it, closer. hear
hard light on the hillside
flatten the visible scale
into two dimensions, and you're in love
with the flatted third:
the way it breaks you down,
over and over, to mean you are
alive. the way you rub it in
the wound that you never
as if you could scrub away the whirling
of everything else and come down
like snow to the center, the eye, so close
to the purity of knowing inside this
present pain, that searing
white place without wind or words.

When I first saw you 
I could glance up from your image in the paper
and out her kitchen doorway watch
my mother trim her artemisia,
scraps of silver trailing
her green wheelbarrow.
And I imagined yes,
if mine were dying,
I would be on the abutment too,
about to release the cable
ignoring those attempting rescue;
imagined your rock-weight drop
pierce Merrimack gray
driving you through layers of silt and barge wake
till your heart burst
its knot of color
oiled into molecular black.

And now that, years later, I have lost mine,
also to disease, I see your face again
transfixed in white and black,
a pale sphere caught
But now I would coax you back
from the railing to tell you:
no matter the number of months that have passed,
what whole rounded year has slipped
a marble from my pocket,
there is a moment of breaking
the surface of whatever hour
and plunging past the floating glass
of doorknobs turned in pain
light shafts driven
further into the enamel
of an incandescent pedal Singer
rimmed in chrome and folds of cloth
whose scent can still drown me
in green oblivion. Floating too
an azure button, despair complete
in its perfect disc, terra cotta saucer
lifted by her hand
with a border of fine red leaves
each holding its breath for all of us,
holding our grief.

that impossible weight
will drop you every day
and arrows of color pierce
your body clear through, the river
for which you might stay.

CARDELIA. THE bassette-table spread, the tallier come,
Why stays SMILINDA in the dressing-room ?
Rise, pensive nymph ! the tallier stays for you.

SMILINDA. Ah ! Madam, since my SHARPER is untrue,
I joyless make my once ador'd alpieu.
I saw him stand behind OMBRELIA's Chair,
And whisper with that soft deluding air,

CARDELIA. Is this the cause of your romantic strains ?
A mightier grief my heavy heart sustains.
As you by love, so I by fortune cross'd,
In one bad deal three Septleva's I lost.

SMILINDA. Is that a grief which you compare with mine ?
With ease the smiles of fortune I resign.
Wou'd all my gold in one bad deal were gone,
Were lovely SHARPFR mine, and mine alone.

CARDELIA. A lover lost, is but a common care,
And prudent nymphs against the change prepare.
The queen of Clubs thrice lost ! Oh ! who cou'd guess
This fatal stroke this unforeseen distress !

She all the pains of love and play does know,
Deeply experienc'd many years ago.
Dear BETTY shall th' important point decide,
BETTY, who oft the pains of each has try'd :
Impartial, she shall say who suffers most,
By cards, ill-usage, or by lovers lost.

LOVEIT. Tell, tell your griefs ; attentive will I stay,
Tho' time is precious, and I want some tea.

CARDELIA. Behold this equipage by MATHERS wrought
With fifty guineas (a great pen'orth !) bought !
See on the tooth-pick MARS and CUPID strive,
And both the struggling figures seem to liue.
Upon the bottom see the Queen's bright face ;
A myrtle foliage round the thimble case ;
JOVE, JOVE himself does on the scissars shine,
The metal and the workmanship divine.

SMILINDA. This snuff-box once the pledge of SHARPER's love,
When rival beauties for the present strove,
(At CORTICELLI's he the raffle won,
There first his passion was in public shown ;
HAZARDIA blush'd, and turn'd her head aside,
A rival's envy all in vain to hide)
This snuff-box will I stake, the prize is mine.

CARDELIA. Alas ! far lesser losses than I bear,
Have made a soldier sigh, a lover swear :
But oh ! what makes the disappointment hard,
In complaisance I took the Queen he gave,
Tho' my own secret wish was for the Knave :
The Knave won son ecart that I had chose,
And the next pull my septleva I lose.

SMILINDA. But ah ! what aggravates the killing smart,
The cruel thought that stabs me to the heart,
This curs'd OMBRELIA, this undoing fair,
By whose vile arts this heavy grief I bear,
She, at whose name I shed these spiteful tears,
She owes to me, the very charms she wears :
An aukward thing when first she came to town,
Her shape unfinish'd and her face unknown ;
She was my friend, I taught her first to spread
Upon her sallow cheeks enlivening red,
I introduc'd her to the park and plays,
And by my Interest COSINS made her stays ;
Ungrateful wretch ! with mimick airs grown pert,
She dares to steal my favourite lover's heart.

CARDELIA. Wretch that I was ! how often have I swore,
When WINNALL tallied, I would punt no more !
I know the bite, yet to my ruin run,
And see the folly which I cannot shun.

SMILINDA. How many maids have SHARPER's vows deceiv'd !
How many curs'd the moment they believ'd !
Yet, his known falshood could no warning prove :
Ah ! what are warnings to a maid in love !

CARDELIA. But of what marble must that breast be form'd,
Can gaze on Bassette, and remain unwarm'd ?
When kings, queens, knaves are set in decent rank,
Expos'd in glorious heaps the tempting bank !
Guineas, half-guineas, all the shining train,
The Winner's pleasure and the Loser's pain ;
In bright confusion open rouleaus lie,
They strike the soul, and glitter in the eye ;
Fir'd by the sight, all reason I disdain,
My passions rise, and will not bear the rein :
Look upon Bassette, you who Reason boast,
And see if Reason may not there be lost !

SMILINDA. What more than marble must that breast compose,
That listens coldly to my SHARPER's vows !
Then when he trembles, when his blushes rise,
When awful Love seems melting in his eyes !
With eager beats his Mechlin cravat moves :
He loves, I whisper to myself, He loves !
Such unfeign'd passion in his look appears,
I lose all mem'ry of my former fears ;
My panting heart confesses all his charms ;
I yield at once, and sink into his arms.
Think of that moment, you who Prudence boast !
For such a moment, Prudence well were lost.

CARDELIA. At the Groom-porter's, batter'd bullies play ;
Some Dukes at Marybon bowl time away :
But who the bowl or rattling dice compares
To Bassette's heavenly joys and pleasing cares ?

SMILINDA. Soft SIMPLICETTA doats upon a beau ;
PRUDINA likes a man, and laughs at show :
Their several graces in my SHARPER meet ;
Strong as the footman, as the master sweet.

LOVEIT. Cease your contention, which has been too long,
I grow impatient, and the tea too strong :
Attend, and yield to what I now decide ;
The equipage shall grace SMILINDA's side ;
The snuff-box to CARDELIA I decree ;
So leave complaining, and begin your tea.

from the Alpine yodel, did Hank Williams in the back seat 
of his Cadillac dream the ululation of Bedouin women

welcoming the horsemen back from war? When I was a boy 
only a fool would fake a country sound, and my father 

farm chores and coveralls. Football got him out. The FBI

gave him a way to travel under cover, but I have heard him, 
years later, after choir practice and the church social, 

it out, a yodel to make Roy Rogers blush. It was no hymn,

My mother adopted words like boocoo and oodles to mask

directly without a sharp correction. Country music 
was not Frank Proffitt or Dock Boggs, but rubes

like Porter and Loretta Lynn, backwoods fabrication 
of waist jackets and swirl skirts, long nights on a bus

and mother hated her mill-town roots so much she whispered 
often enough, something would catch her funny bone

to ditch their chifforobes and pie safes, get matching sets 
from Ethan Allen, eat ravioli and pave the drive. Denial, 

experts would say, but the cracker backlash is now 
upon us, every professor and Appalachian scholar 
desperate to sound authentic, to drop the terminal

r and double the syllables, to say bodacious or I favor 
apple fruit or Would you kindly wallop my dodger? 

tin tongue. We crave it riddled with mongrel grammar, 
the sinus cavities set all a-tremble. We want to taste it 
with sorghum syrup, to catch that yokel power,

desperation, the provenance of a Depression fiddle. 
If a Swiss watch pops its mainspring, what echoes 

Call it hick bliss tinged with mimosa scent 

vogue or red clay homegrown slang: it holds my 
the whole history of shaped pain shaved down

shackled in our Caliban stage to yawp and Celtic keen, 

moan of the midnight Macon train.

There's a black bear
in the apple tree
and he won't come down.
I can hear him panting,
like an athlete.
I can smell the stink
of his body.

Come down, black bear.
Can you hear me?

The mind is the most interesting thing to me;
like the sudden death of the sun,
it seems implausible that darkness will swallow it
or that anything is lost forever there,
like a black bear in a fruit tree,
gulping up sour apples
with dry sucking sounds,

or like us at the pier, somber and tired,
making food from sunlight,
you saying a word, me saying a word, trying hard,
though things were disintegrating.
Still, I wanted you,
your lips on my neck,
Forlorn and anonymous:
I didn't want to be that. I could hear
the great barking monsters of the lower waters
calling me forward.

You see, my mind takes me far,
but my heart dreams of return.
Black bear,
with pale-pink tongue
at the center of his face,
is turning his head,
like the face of Christ from life.
Shaking the apple boughs,
he is stronger than I am
no fear, no pain, no tenderness. I want to be that.

Come down, black bear,
I want to learn the faith of the indifferent.

I 
I wonder do you feel to-day
      As I have felt since, hand in hand,
We sat down on the grass, to stray
      In spirit better through the land,
This morn of Rome and May?

II 
For me, I touched a thought, I know,
      Has tantalized me many times,
(Like turns of thread the spiders throw
      Mocking across our path) for rhymes
To catch at and let go.

III 
Help me to hold it! First it left
      The yellowing fennel, run to seed
There, branching from the brickwork's cleft,
      Some old tomb's ruin: yonder weed
Took up the floating weft,

IV 
Where one small orange cup amassed
Among the honey-meal: and last,
      Everywhere on the grassy slope
I traced it. Hold it fast!

V 
The champaign with its endless fleece
      Of feathery grasses everywhere!
Silence and passion, joy and peace,
Rome's ghost since her decease.

VI 
Such life here, through such lengths of hours,
      Such miracles performed in play,
Such primal naked forms of flowers,
      Such letting nature have her way
While heaven looks from its towers!

VII 
How say you? Let us, O my dove,
      Let us be unashamed of soul,
As earth lies bare to heaven above!
      How is it under our control
To love or not to love?

VIII 
I would that you were all to me,
      You that are just so much, no more.
Nor yours nor mine, nor slave nor free!
      Where does the fault lie? What the core
O' the wound, since wound must be?

IX 
I would I could adopt your will,
      See with your eyes, and set my heart
Beating by yours, and drink my fill
In life, for good and ill.

X 
No. I yearn upward, touch you close,
      Then stand away. I kiss your cheek,
Then the good minute goes.

XI 
Already how am I so far
      Out of that minute? Must I go
Still like the thistle-ball, no bar,
      Onward, whenever light winds blow,
Fixed by no friendly star?

XII 
Just when I seemed about to learn!
      Where is the thread now? Off again!
      Infinite passion, and the pain
Of finite hearts that yearn.

Another day come, add it 
To the list, the
Not to do list.
Son of mine,
I was rambling across the undercarpeting
Strewn with imperceptible tacks
In one shapeless slip-on
When a pain rang out in my flank
And I fell to,
Braying,
But who should answer but no one.
Let us sit a bit in this ill-starred
Suit in the form-filling
Chamber of subtraction,
Listing.
Left in me. Speak to me
Son, vague one. 
For this is where it thickens,
Me here and it there and me there and them here
And you with the soul.
All the day poking 
Radishes for remembrance.
For this is a private matter 
Between a man and his scaffolding
And it shall remain so 
Privation permitting.

And accustomed ungentle hands of two blue-uniformed attendants
sewn with bright invisible emblems of virtues,
or pinned with them, as with fraternity pins, or mosaic pins,
meaning travel. Has he always only just arrived?
Really suffering, within and without his head
and does the time and place outwardly expound
what is within? To be well, to wear new clothes,
to decimate his wage for a necktie, a scarf or gloves, love
no cold cloths, though to be him bent on him
eyes of those called to selflessness, lonely for more selfish days.
I

Beneath one apple tree the fruit 
lies flung like the beads from
 a rosary with a broken string. 
Another tree stands amused 
over the strangeness of a shoe 
that pretends to be an apple 
in its redness, though it'll never be 
an apple with that lace stem 
and a pit where a core should be.

The tree at the end of the row 
will weep over the pillage 
all week. Around its trunk, debris: 
straw hats, handkerchief, a basket 
going hungry for what's out
of reach. Somewhere in the orchard 
a screech goes weaker by the hour. 
A radio without paws, it cannot claw 
its chords to end its suffering.

But silence comes, eventually,
 and the apple trees will rest, 
gathering the shadows to their roots 
as the flame inside each apple
 falls asleep. All the while, finches
vultures waiting for the fruit to rot. 
For a wasp, intoxicated by the sugars, 
this is the perfect place to nest.

The colony will thrive inside 
decay: the apples softening until 
their wrinkled skins begin to sink, 
the seeds poking through like teeth. 
The trees will sway without the wind 
because the ground will boil 
with larvae. A bird will feast 
until it chokes and ants will march 
into the belly through the beak.

II

A strand of hair pretends to be
a crack and sticks to glass. A piece
of thread sits on a seat, pretends
to be a tear. The bus makes believe
no one cried into their hands and smeared
that grief onto its walls. The walls
will keep the fingerprints a secret
until the sheen of oils glows by moon.
Rows of ghosts come forth to sing.
Until that keening rocks the bus
 to rest, the fumes intoxicate 
 to the shuffling of feet and a final act 
of fury: the yanking of a wetback's 
shirt. The button popped right off 
the flannel, marched in the procession 
and then scurried to the side. The lesson: 

The bus breathes out the shapes
 turned silhouettes turned scent 
of salt and sweat. The steering wheel 
unspools, every window shaking loose 
the wetness of its glare. And now 
a riddle squats over the parking lot: 
What creature stands its ground 
after evisceration? Roadkill. Clouds 
close in to consume the afterbirth.

III

A mausoleum also keeps these gems: 
precipitation that hardens into diamonds 
on the cobweb stems, streams of urine 
that shimmer like streaks of gold. 
Lights coax out the coat of polish 
on the floor and what's solid softens
 into water stripped of ripples. Stilled 
and empty, a river that has shoved 
its pebbles down its throat.

The cell holds out three drops of blood 
and will barter them for company,
 hungry for the smell of men again. Janitor, 
border guard or detainee, it's all the same 
musk of armpit, garlic breath, oils 
that bubble up from crack to tailbone,
 scent of semen from the foreskin, 
fungus from the toes. Without takers, 
the keyhole constricts in the cold.

IV

A red-tailed hawk breaks through 
the smoke and doesn't drop the way 
the bodies did when the plane 
began to dive and spat pieces of its 
cargo out the door. No grace, the twitching 
of such a great machine. No beauty to 
its blackening inside the pristine 
made by a torch and not a paintbrush.

The hawk lands on the canyon 
and snaps its neck in quick response 
to the vulgar cracking on the boulders, 
to the shrill of metal puncturing 
the canyon, to the burst of flames 
that traps a nest of mice within the lair
 turned furnace, burning shriek, and hair. 
Stunned host of sparrows scatters. 
Fume of feathers, pollution in the air.

Poison in the lungs of all that breathes. 
A darkness rises. The blue absorbs it 
the way it dissipates a swarm after 
the crisis of a shattered hive. Heaven 
shows its mercy also, swallowing 
the groan that spilled out of the hill. 
No signs of tragedy by dusk 
except a star splayed over rock, 

V

What strange flowers grow
in the shadow. Without petals
and with crooked twigs for stems.
The butterflies that pollinated them
were bits of carbon glowing
at the edge. The solitary lone wolf
spider doesn't dare to bite
the scorched caul on the canyon.
It packs its fangs for brighter lands.

The footprints drawn in black 
do not match the footprints 
in the orchard though they also 
bear the weight of the unwanted. 
The chain gang called upon to gather 
the debris sang the Prison Blues 
all afternoon: Inmate, deportee, 
in your last attempt to flee 
every bone splits into three.

VI

Twenty-eight equals one 
deportation bus equals one 
cell in the detention center, one
 plane-load of deportees, one 
plunge into the canyon, one 
body in the coffin although one 
anymore among the chaperone 
of angels with wings of stone.

Y un Deportado No Identificado.
No papers necessary to cross 
the cemetery. The sun floods 
the paths between tombs 
and everything pushes out 
into light. No shame to be 
a cherub without a nose. 
The wreath will not hide
 its decay. Cement displays 
its injuries with no regrets.

This is the place to forget 
about labor and hardship and pain. 
No house left to build, no kitchen 
to clean, no chair on a porch, no 
children to feed. No longing left 
except a wish that will never come 
true: Paint us back into the blank 
sky's blue. Don't forget us
 like we've forgotten all of you.

I say to the named granite stone, to the brown grass,
to the dead chrysanthemums, Mother, I still have a
body, what else could receive my mind's transmissions,
its dots and dashes of pain? I expect and get no answer,
no loamy scent of her coral geraniums. She who is now
immaterial, for better or worse, no longer needs to speak
for me to hear, as in a continuous loop, classic messages
of wisdom, love and fury. MAKE! DO! a note on our fridge
commanded. Here I am making, unmaking, doing, undoing.

Within this sober frame expect 
Work of no foreign architect; 
That unto caves the quarries drew, 
And forests did to pastures hew; 
Who of his great design in pain 
Did for a model vault his brain; 

The beasts are by their dens exprest, 
And birds contrive an equal nest; 
In cases fit of tortoise-shell; 
No creature loves an empty space; 
Their bodies measure out their place. 

But he, superfluously spread, 
Demands more room alive than dead; 
And in his hollow palace goes 
Where winds as he themselves may lose. 
What need of all this marble crust 

But all things are composed here 
Like nature, orderly and near; 
In which we the dimensions find 
Of that more sober age and mind, 
When larger sized men did stoop 
To enter at a narrow loop; 
As practising, in doors so straight, 

And surely when the after age 
Shall hither come in pilgrimage, 
These sacred places to adore, 
By Vere and Fairfax trod before, 
Men will dispute how their extent 
Within such dwarfish confines went; 
And some will smile at this, as well 
As Romulus his bee-like cell. 

Humility alone designs 
Those short but admirable lines, 
The circle in the quadrature! 
These holy mathematics can 

Yet thus the laden house does sweat, 
And scarce endures the master great, 
But where he comes the swelling hall 
Stirs, and the square grows spherical; 
And too officiously it slights 
That in itself which him delights. 

So honour better lowness bears, 
Than that unwonted greatness wears; 
Height with a certain grace does bend, 
But low things clownishly ascend. 
And yet what needs there here excuse, 
Where neatness nothing can condemn, 
Nor pride invent what to contemn? 

A stately frontispiece of poor 
Adorns without the open door; 
Nor less the rooms within commends 
Daily new furniture of friends. 
The house was built upon the place 
Only as for a mark of grace; 
And for an inn to entertain 
Its lord a while, but not remain. 

Him Bishops-Hill, or Denton may, 
Or Billbrough, better hold than they; 
But nature here hath been so free 
As if she said leave this to me. 
What she had laid so sweetly waste; 
In fragrant gardens, shady woods, 
Deep meadows, and transparent floods.

1
Adrift in the middle of my years, I sit in a corner and drink. I eavesdrop
a tableful of girls romancing their cell phones, workshopping
I listen like a thief in case the women know the score.
But I never could tell. At fulltime I walk home like a motherless child.
2
but back in my room I ring like a singing bowl,
empty and unable to stop.
the twenty-seven strains of despair. And your lovely hair has fallen.
The moon at my window is a rusted shot, caught in its corrupt trajectory down.
3
while beyond me the world peters and my friend fights beautifully

I am a girl who sees the world in everything.
I wonder in a 100 years if the world will just flip.
I upload the roar of children, chop cauliflower
because I want to see the ones I love
as loving me forever. I see colorful daisies
as the children of lawns
swaying unfruitfully in the wind. I want the ones
who pretend they are without wings to protect me
in that instant I understand almost everything

Pretending I am flying
over the worry and loss of this city
into the warm sun, to touch who l can.
that nothing will be easy, ever
if all of this is happening for reasons,
that that family is my family, crying out in pain,
thin daisies bent flat in a summer wind.

I understand that almost, when they cry
why nothing is easy in this world with its reasons.
I see something good that is in everyone. In a 100
years I wonder will the world just flip.

Down the long hall she glistens like a star,
The foam-born mother of Love, transfixed to stone,
Yet none the less immortal, breathing on.
Time's brutal hand hath maimed but could not mar.
When first the enthralled enchantress from afar
Dazzled mine eyes, I saw not her alone,
Serenely poised on her world-worshipped throne,
But at her feet a pale, death-stricken Jew,
Her life adorer, sobbed farewell to love.
Here Heine wept! Here still he weeps anew,
Nor ever shall his shadow lift or move,
While mourns one ardent heart, one poet-brain,
For vanished Hellas and Hebraic pain.

into the sweet

comprising the mussel, 
winged open: yellow- 

fleshed, black and gray
around the tough
adductor? It hurts

to imagine it, regardless
denials, swiveling 

his knife to make 
the incision: one
dull cyst nicked

gland no bigger

than a seed 
inside the tendered

flesh. Both hosts eased
open with a knife 
(as if anything

could be said to be eased
with a knife): 
so that one pearl

after another can be 
harvested, polished, 
added to others 

until a single rope is strung 
on silk. Linked 
by what you think

is pain. Nothing 
could be so roughly 
handled and yet feel 

so little, your pity 
turned into part of this 
production: you 

with your small,
four-chambered heart, 
shyness, hungers, envy: what

could be so precious 
another to keep it

close? Imagine 
the weeks it takes to wind 
nacre over the red

seed placed at the other 
The mussel 

become what no one 
wants to:
vessel, caisson, wounded 

into making us 
the thing we want
to call beautiful.

I

He whom we anatomized
speaks
to us, hatching marrow,
broody all night over the bones of a deadman.

My tongue is a curve in the ear. Vision is lies.
We saw is so and it was not so,
Matthew Paris his kings in blue and gold.)

It was not so,
by God, by God knows who.

In the dark in fetters
on bended elbows I supported my weak back
unresonant. It was gone, is silent, is always silent.
My soundbox lacks sonority. All but inaudible
I stammer to my ear:
Naked speech! Naked beggar both blind and cold!
wrap it in curves and cover it with sleek lank hair.

with magic in darkness, I unforewained.
The golden hands are not in Averrhoes,
makes my head wuzz. Have pity, have pity on me!

below hardness darkness above
with equal intervals without
In those days rode the good Lorraine
whom English burned at Rouen,

White gobs spitten for mockery;
and I too shall have CY GIST, written over me.

that DEATH is written over all.

they are so rotten, old and thin,
fellmonger Death gets every skin.

as we forgive our debtors, Death?

Abelard and Eloise,
die, die in pain.

like Tyro and Antiope
drift among ghosts in Hell,

driving across a mind
is, to be sifted by the wind,

We are less permanent than thought.
The Emperor with the Golden Hands

is still a word, a tint, a tone,
insubstantial-glorious,
and the green grass growing over us.

II

Let his days be few and let
his bishoprick pass to another,
mouldy bread that his dogs had vomited,
fettered to a post in the damp cellarage.
only the military tread and the snap of the locks.
I lay and cursed the weary sun.
They took away the prison clothes
and on the frosty nights I froze.
I had a Bible where I read
I kept myself from going mad
by singing an old bawdy ballad
and birds sang on my windowsill
and tortured me till I was ill,
but Archipiada came to me
and comforted my cold body
and Circe excellent utterer of her mind
lay with me in that dungeon for a year
till Ronsard put a thimble on her tongue.
they have set private enquiry agents onto Archipiada:
What is your name? Your maiden name?
Distinguishing marks if any? (O anthropometrics!)
Now the thumbprints for filing.
Colour of hair? of eyes? of hands? O Bertillon!
How many golden prints on the smudgy page?
Homer? Adest. Dante? Adest.
Adsunt omnes, omnes et
Villon.
Villon?
Blacked by the sun, washed by the rain,
hither and thither scurrying as the wind varies.

III

walking alone
very seldom
over the sea seldom
where it ravelled and spun
blue tapestries white and green
and the men of the sea
who have neither nation nor time
the white mountains beyond
or the brown mountains between
and their drifting echoes
in the clouds and over the sea
in shrines on their ridges
the goddess of the country
silverplated in silk and embroidery
with offerings of pictures
because of the beauty of Helen

precision clarifying vagueness;
boundary to a wilderness
of detail; chisel voice
smoothing the flanks of noise;
factor that resolves
name of the nameless;
to frigid limbs

no variety of death,
is silent with the silence of a single note.

Unclean, immature and unseasonable salmon.

Creative despair and failure have made their patient.
Those crazy phrases I desecrated the paper
Temporarily, like a hasty, ill-paid waitress
Mistaken praise and blame degrade profane and sacred
Vacant the gymnasium where words once played naked

Better, then, the effort than preterite perfection,
The special effects I am ready to inherit
Of aesthetic gesture. Unpleasant and pretentious,
The mess men might yet make of themselves, given present

The past cannot matter except as an abstraction,
Wherein many a grand, imaginary castle
A vast palace that adrastic phantoms inhabit.
Ask vatic questions, exact a magic answer:
Granny, Dad, Aunt Sally, that dissatisfied madame

The mathematical vision which built this system
Primitive physics, a sophisticated fiction,
And cricket pitch wherein the winner is the victim.
Hidden riches fill big individual middens;

It seems that we have been a brief season in Eden:
Trees repeated in completely meaningless series
Even as we seek relief in a secret clearing.
Teach us to weep the cheap and easy tears of reason;

Judged by the numbers that once flourished in the jungle
Unless somebody was insufferably ugly
Unsuccess in a dozen tough struggles instructs us
For a month, but in a millenium no wonder
The mysteries of dust are nothing to live up to.

Undone by the siesta and by sudden showers,
You falter at mounds memorial to a thousand
Submitted to the sun, insatiable flesh-flower
Confounded by our sound of pronounceable vowels.
Though mood and voice and person, gender, tense, and number

Proper noun or pronoun, indubitably human,
Doomed to the brutal usufructu of the future,
You used to choose the rules with superfluous humour,
Whose smooth, translucent route through roofless rooms illumines
Tulum and its improvements, tumulus and ruins,
Who knew nude truth from rumour, amusement from music

What was lost was often all we had got in common,
Gods begotten of loss, not bronze nor terra cotta,
Following the Long Count a lot has been forgotten:
Soporific concepts toppled by fall or conquest,

At any moment the doors of the soul may open
Coasts of tomorrow begin to impose the order
O mornings that broke on the slopes of cold volcanos,
Slowly unfolded, or a brocade robe thrown over
Hope, an emotion swollen by every omen,
Topaz or opal, adorns the close of the strophe.

Ode: this leafy, streamless land where coy waters loiter
Of another culture destroyed by lack of moisture,
Archaeological lawyers exploit the foibles
Imperfectly convinced of final disappointment,
Pen poised for the pointless impressions of those voices

Finally I try to define why divine silence
Priceless as the insights of the inspired psyche,
Fine ideas likely to undermine the idle
Lifelike, provided life survives its vital cycle
While mankind, sightless, frightened, like a child in twilight,

The mathematical vision which built this system
(The mysteries of dust are nothing to live up to!)
You used to choose the rules with superfluous humour:
Slowly unfolded, like a brocade robe thrown over.
Finally I tried to define why divine silence ...

Sweet beats of jazz impaled on slivers of wind
Kansas Black Morning/ First Horn Eyes/
Historical sound pictures on New Bird wings
Gold belled pipe of stops and future Blues Times
Lurking Hawkins/ shadows of Lester/ realization
Ghetto thoughts/ bandstand courage/ solo flight
Nerve-wracked suspicions of newer songs and doubts
New York alter city/ black tears/ secret disciples
Hammer horn pounding soul marks on unswinging gates
Culture gods/ mob sounds/ visions of spikes
Panic excursions to tribal Jazz wombs and transfusions
Heroin nights of birth/ and soaring/ over boppy new ground.
Smothered rage covering pyramids of notes spontaneously exploding
Cool revelations/ shrill hopes/ beauty speared into greedy ears
Birdland nights on bop mountains, windy saxophone revolutions.
Dayrooms of junk/ and melting walls and circling vultures/
Money cancer/ remembered pain/ terror flights/
Death and indestructible existence
In that Jazz corner of life
Wrapped in a mist of sound
His legacy, our Jazz-tinted dawn
Wailing his triumphs of oddly begotten dreams
Inviting the nerveless to feel once more
That fierce dying of humans consumed
In raging fires of Love.

Now the god of rainy August hangs his mask
and stone clocktowers half-effaced in clouds.
On Park the first reflecting pool dims
with a thousand smelted-silver circle-rims,
while west on Fifth a modiste scatters leaves
in fall vitrines, and felt-browed mannequins
resign the world with gestures of disdain.

floods copper gutterings, boxwood, terraced urns
the smiling Gaul, the murderer Clotaire,
and Isaiah, green-throned, water-cowled, exchange
their fine-lit ironies for rotes of pain.

Was he married, did he try 
Wife and family? 

No, 
He never suffered such a blow. 

Unwanted by everyone and in the way? 

His bent strong and his mind full. 

Yet find them die one day? 

He did not love in the human way. 

Did he ask how long it would go on, 
Wonder if Death could be counted on for an end? 

He had a future of bliss. 

Pain for being wrong? 

But there is no suffering like having made a mistake 
Because of being of an inferior make. 

He was superior. 

He knew then that power corrupts but some must govern? 

His thoughts were different. 

Did he lack friends? Worse, 
Think it was for his fault, not theirs? 

He did not lack friends, 

Did he feel over-handicapped sometimes, yet must draw even? 

...find a sudden brightness one day in everything 
Because a mood had been conquered, or a sin? 

Do only human beings suffer from the irritation 

Only human beings feel this, 

He makes him up like this on purpose. 

He might have made him up worse. 

He often has, in the past. 

Is a little move then? 

A larger one will be when men 
Love love and hate hate but do not deify them? 

It was the fruit I wanted, not the nest.
The nest was hanging like the richest fruit
against the sun. I took the nest

and with it came the heart, and in my hand
the kingdom and the queen, frail surfaces,
rested for a moment. Then the drones

awoke and did their painful business.
I let the city drop upon the stones.
It split to its deep palaces and combs.

It bled the insect gold,
the pupa queens like tiny eyes
wriggled from their sockets, and somewhere

the monarch cowered in a veil of wings
in passages through which at evening
the labourers had homed,

burdened with silence and the garden scents.
The secret heart was broken suddenly.
I, to whom the knowledge had been given,

who was not after knowledge but a fruit,
remember how a knot of pains
swelled my hand to a round nest;

blood throbbed in the hurt veins
as if an unseen swarm mined there.
The nest oozed bitter honey.

I swaddled my fat hand in cotton.
After a week pain gave it back to me
scarred and weakened like a shrivelled skin.

A second fruit is growing on the tree.
It ripens. I have another hand.

Everything that was young went quickly,
the way his eyes met mine as soon as we

woke together in a room outside Nanjing,
feeling as if all the things that were falling

would fall and make their thunder, leave
us with the challenge of being happy,

all the things that felt given when gifts
were not just surprises, but what we

knew, what we hoped to take with us
to heaven, unbound by faults and sins,

not deceived the way we were when
the end came to what we knew of China,

landing me here. I am a wish in the skies
spun out from celestial space to be poor,

to be covered with black skin, a felt

through pain as big as hogs squealing

the noise of death, the shrill needle
that turns clouds over to rip the air

above the cities where people are young
and all that is given is never taken away.

The incoherent rushing of the train
Dulls like a drugged pain

Numbs
To an ether throbbing of inaudible drums

Unfolds
Hush within hush until the night withholds

Only its darkness.
Dark a voice calls like a voice in sleep

Slowly a strange name in a strange tongue.

Among

The sleeping listeners a sound
As leaves stir faintly on the ground

Who needs to be at peace in the world? It helps to be between wars, to die
your feet, the eyes poking night only to find another night to compare it to.
too much.
That lightly draws its breath, 
And feels its life in every limb, 
What should it know of death? 

I met a little cottage Girl: 
She was eight years old, she said; 
Her hair was thick with many a curl 
That clustered round her head. 

She had a rustic, woodland air, 
And she was wildly clad: 
Her eyes were fair, and very fair; 

And wondering looked at me. 

And two of us at Conway dwell, 
And two are gone to sea. 

My sister and my brother; 
And, in the church-yard cottage, I 

And two are gone to sea, 
Yet ye are seven! I pray you tell, 

Then did the little Maid reply, 
Two of us in the church-yard lie, 

Your limbs they are alive; 
If two are in the church-yard laid, 

The little Maid replied, 
And they are side by side. 

My kerchief there I hem; 
And there upon the ground I sit, 
And sing a song to them. 

When it is light and fair, 
I take my little porringer, 
And eat my supper there. 

In bed she moaning lay, 
Till God released her of her pain; 
And then she went away. 

And, when the grass was dry, 
Together round her grave we played, 
My brother John and I. 

And I could run and slide, 
My brother John was forced to go, 

The little Maid would have her will, 

But now she cries, Dool and a well-a-day!
Come doun the green gait and come here away!

He said he saw naething sae lovely as me;
He hecht me baith rings and monie braw things;
And werena my heart licht, I wad dee.

Because I was twice as bonnie as she;
That werena my heart licht, I wad dee.

The day it was set, and the bridal to be
The wife took a dwam and lay doun to dee;

Albeit I was bonnie, I wasna for Johnnie:
And werena my heart licht, I wad dee.

They said I had neither cow nor calf,
An werena my heart licht, I wad dee.

His tittie she was baith wily and slee,
And then she ran in and made a loud din;
Believe your ain een an ye trow na me.

And werena my heart licht I wad dee.

And wow, gin I were but young for thee.

Then the day passed into the evening,
a sovereign, darkening blue. And
the twenty-six lost miners,
if living at all, knew nothing of the hour:
not the languid canter
of light, or the wind
curled through the hedgerows. Not pain.
Not rage. If living at all then
just this: a worm of black water
at the lower back. At the lungs
two tablets of air.

What is it like there? the broadcaster asked,
his voice and the slow reply
cast down through the time zones of America.

A stillness. All of the families
asleep in the fire station.
And the mineworks pale on the landscape.

What else?
Nothing. Blue lights of police cars.

What else?
Nothing.
Nothing?
...The thrum of the crickets.

A thousand files on a thousand scrapers.
A thousand taut membranes called mirrors
amplifying the breed-song. A landscape of cupped wings
amplifying the breed-song. A thousand bodies
so in tune with the dusk's warmth
it slows when a cloud passes over.
Today. Tomorrow. In that May Nova Scotia darkness
when the earth flared and collapsed.
Before that May. After that darkness.
On the larch bud. On the fire station.
On shale and the grind-steps of magma.
On the gold straining in its seam bed.
On the coal straining. On the twenty-six headlamps
swaying through the drift tunnels. On the bud.
On the leaves, on the meadow grass,
on the wickerwork of shrubs:
dark cape of desire.

The birds against the April wind
  Flew northward, singing as they flew;

  The sickened camp, the blazing town!

  We saw your march-worn children die;
In shrouds of moss, in cypress swamps,
  We saw your dead uncoffined lie.

  And saw, from line and trench, your sons
Follow our flight with home-sick eyes

  The treason-nursing mischief spurned,
  The long-estranged and lost returned.

  And hands horn-hard with unpaid toil,
With hope in every rustling fold,
  We saw your star-dropt flag uncoil.

  A grateful murmur clomb the air;
A whisper scarcely heard at first,
  It filled the listening heavens with prayer.

  Replied a voice which shall not cease,
Till, drowning all the noise of war,

So to me, in a doubtful day
  Of chill and slowly greening spring,
Low stooping from the cloudy gray,
  The wild-birds sang or seemed to sing.

They vanished in the misty air,
  The song went with them in their flight;
But lo! they left the sunset fair,
  And in the evening there was light.

When her recorded voice on the phone 
said who she was again and again to the piles 
of newspapers and magazines and the clothes 

in the chairs and the bags of unopened mail 
and garbage and piles of unwashed dishes.

When she could no longer walk 
to-help-me way of walking, with her head 

bent down to her knees as if she were searching 
for a dime that had rolled into a crack 

on the floor, though it was impossible to see 
the floor. When the pain in her foot she disclosed
to no one was so bad she could not stand 

at her refrigerator packed with food and sniff 
to find what was edible. When she could hardly 

even sit as she loved to sit, all night 
on the toilet, with the old rinsed diapers 
hanging nearby on the curtainless bar 

of the shower stall, and the shoes lined up
in the tub, falling asleep and waking up 

while she cut out newspaper clippings 
and listened to the late-night talk 
on her crackling radio about alien landings 

and why the government had denied them. 
When she drew the soapy rag across the agonizing 

ache of her foot trying over and over to wash
the black from her big toe and could not

When at last they came to carry my mother 
out of the wilderness of that house

and she lay thin and frail and disoriented
between bouts of tests and X-rays, 
and I came to find her in the white bed 

of her white room among nurses who brushed 
her hair while she looked up at them and smiled

with her yellow upper plate that seemed to hold
her face together, dazed and disbelieving, 
as if she were in heaven, 

then turned, still smiling, to the door 
where her stout, bestroked younger brother 

teetered into the room on his cane, all the way 
from Missouri with her elderly sister 
and her bald-headed baby brother, 

whom she despised. When he smiled back
and dipped his bald head down to kiss her, 

and her sister and her other brother hugged her
with serious expressions, and her childish 
astonishment slowly changed 

to suspicion and the old wildness returned
to her eye because she began to see
this was not what she wanted at all, 
I sitting down by her good ear holding her hand 
to talk to her about going into the home

that was not her home, her baby brother winking,
the others nodding and saying, Listen to Wesley. 

When it became clear to her that we were not 
her people, the ones she had left behind 
in her house, on the radio, in the newspaper 

clippings, in the bags of unopened mail, 
in her mind, and she turned her face away 

so I could see the print of red on her cheek 
as if she had been slapped hard. 
When the three of them began to implore 

their older sister saying, Ruth, Ruth, 
and We come out here for your own good, 

and That time rolls around for all of us, 
getting frustrated and mad because they meant, 
but did not know they meant, themselves too.

When the gray sister, the angriest of them, 
finally said through her pleated lips 

and lower plate, You was always 
turn around and say something. 

When the very last grief
deadens all our pain,
I will follow you there
on the very next train,
not because I lack strength 
to ponder the end result,
but maybe you forgot to bring
pills, a necktie, razor blades . . . 
What hand opened the door, I don't know. No one
lives there in winter. And I don't know if it was for entrance
though I do know what boundaries
were broken. The lake lay frozen, the sky
still as folded wings. And everywhere snow

blown into the rooms, strewn across the braided rugs
and knotty boards, under chairs, creeping
like a slow cold tide, white and silent, out of its element

with greed. Then I remembered the photograph,
black and white, as old as me or older. What eye
watched that scene, taking it in, shameless, I don't know,
though I do know that boundaries were broken:

A woman, her grey dress blowing toward land,
lost on the shore in the dim light of her long day's end,

and the stolen child it drank up when each
entered the other in a moment
of dropped vigilance. In this kind of world no blueprint

instructs us how to house what we love
against the winds of loss. The woman, the man,
swallowed whole. I am not going to try to feel

what that woman felt, or to speak with her voice. I don't know
what she did next or how she did what she did next.
She is the mother, my fear, all the love ever lost to grief.
Her pain is an ocean vaster than planets, a diaspora

of longing flung to all four flogging winds. In her life,
I am sure that time drifted past her, with her, within her.
I know that that summer, like all summers, moved on
through the fall into winter, that the shore closed up,
abandoned, cold. And that the thing lost

still blows through us, the swollen door no longer shuts.

is not lost though the hour is late and you've got light pockets.

for medicine. But that business of the first kiss is hard to fathom:

you trusted your life to in a bit of a spin, head swimming
a thing of the past, only a particle of the action now, nothing

separate, a luminous tumult, an affair of air and palate, air
insects shedding your dry, chitinous skins. And although what's left

is raw for a while, the slightest breath burns it, in time it comes
the here it is: two clean rooms in the next parish to wholeness.

 

Because the facial features burn fastest.

Because the sun sets in Tibet before it ever rises in the West.

For I find no flattering explanation for the murder of everyone.

Flames consume the head, hands, and feet in the mural by Orozco.

Because his remains stiffened when they tried to place him in a tomb.

Because what is the point of murdering everyone in the world?

Since the sun sets in Vietnam before it reaches the West.

Why do heretic Indians hurry to incinerate themselves at the stake?

Are you awake enough to remember how we clarify the skin of our slaves?

To feel the fingers of the children of thread flame stitching your voluminous rugs?

The candles in the basilica flicker when they channel the nightmares of the dead.

Because of Chinese soldiers armed to protect Tiananmen Square from monks burning to set themselves ablaze.

Each time we moved to a new apartment,
and we did three times, I knew
I shouldn't, that I should
leave while I had the chance, but each
time we moved to a new apartment
we were desperate,
had been kicked out or priced out
and we only had one bed,
no savings, just friends
some of whom knew that you fractured
your hand punching through a wall,
inches from my head,
and some of whom were aware
that you threw things at me
when I said things
you didn't like, as if my words were 
things I threw at you first.
It made sense to you.
I can't remember the bad things
memory enraged
you, and why not: I always
remembered the bad
things you did.
And, yes, I do remember
everything you threw:
a chair
over our heads at a bar (Liz was
there), a mirror like a frisbee
aimed at my knees,
a carton of fried rice that splat
on the shade of our only
nice lamp, oil stains
patterned it with tiny bugs.
Also, you threw
me against a
wall, but you always said it was because
I made you so mad because
you loved me so much
and didn't want to lose me
that you'd lose control
instead and later
beg me to stay, that if I left you
it meant you would never
be loved and I couldn't
bear to have you think that
about either one of us.
I wasn't someone
who'd let herself be hit; I'd never
take that from a man. A man
would be a criminal
if he did what you did.
But you had been
hurt and all that
pain and anger needed more
time, and I made you so
crazy, I was so
stubborn and good at mean
words, what else were you
supposed to do?
You liked to raise your fist pretending
to hit me and then
half-smile when
I winced or cringed. It was important
that you had never actually hit me,
never punched me
with a closed fist: you'd only grabbed me
and choked me and flung me and made
dents in the wall next to me,
and narrowly missed me, but we knew you
meant to miss, never truly
meant to clobber me
on the head with something heavy,
something light, maybe,
like a book I loved.
When a woman you love hits you
on the head with a book
you love, is that love?
I was so ashamed and afraid someone
would find out about us, then I was
afraid and ashamed
people already knew but didn't know
what to do. Did I really think
this was a secret?
Not from the cops we called during two bad
fights or from Peggy who let you stay
with her rent-free that month
I kicked you out. You two had a blast.
But I couldn't pay the rent
on my own,
so you moved back in, triumphant,
Peggy still in love with you,
and you gloated about
how much money you'd saved.
Surrounded by friends,
whom could I tell?
Why would I tell anyone who didn't
already know us well enough
to already know?
If everyone knew, none of us said so.
We talked, all of us, almost
constantly, intimately,
so how did we keep ourselves so quiet?
You and I, together in this,
were alone with this,
alone among women who loved us.
The two of us never more alone
than when together.

When, in the science museum, I arrive at the overview
of our galaxy, with its tiny arrow pointing to You are here
(which really ought to be We are here), and see
that the two to four hundred billion stars of our local cluster
are drifting or chasing or dreaming after each other
of those ancient paintings and rock engravings,
discovered all over our celestial body,
of that one line which begins at whatever point
it can, then curls outward, or inward, toward nothing
by Aborigine and Celt, by mathematician
and engineer and Burning Man reveler alike,
and even accorded a place of honor among the mess
of thoughts on my desk, as a nifty paper clip of copper.
crisscrossing with the precision of a logarithm,
and in the pin-wheel shape of the Nautilus shell,
and in the coiling neurons of the cochlea
as a flush of the toilet, when its swirling is a variation
on our sidereal drift, our existential pain.
circling into some dread, some pernicious chaos
we thought we had just escaped, one town burning
a decade behind us, a millennium before that,
and into next week, next year, next whenever.
And when the two of us took that winding road
an infinity of others had wound down before us
and would wind down again, our spirits hushed
and just burning in the dry heat to touch each other,

This was a true happening but (as you 
will see shortly) not such as would ready me  
for future ones. What has brisk disaster  
to do with a leisurely ordeal? 
Neither event, as you will notice also,  
has made me an understanding man. 
It was my watch one night, away then on  
the sea, when leaning on a couple of crates  
of something I dreamed of nothing special  
into the dark, and whispered the smoke of a  
sugared native product into the dark. 
Then from behind a quick rush burst not six  
feet over me with a sawing and then 
a cracking sound, and the other watch  
pointed up where a black squall ran port-side  
into the distance and a six by six 
crate lid veered and disappeared like a gull.  
But the other time we were idle ashore 
for days somewhere there are sandy foothills 
and small plains with weeds that stand like birds,  
and there was a steady blow on land 
that left off out at sea, leaving us all 
peculiar if I remember. The wind 
rasped the dense whorls of sharp leaves low on the ground  
and shrilled through the heads on the tall seed-stalks,  
and all those days the sound rose until we,  
without hope, without breath bore the conviction  
that our sojourn had not begun and had  
no end, like a period of dissipation. 

In certain Spanish havens the beggars come 
would have said something of that kind and proffered  
a gratifying smile to their junior 
treasurer the other Tuesday and maybe 
been spared a peculiar fall. For forgetting 
their cards or missing dues or due to rancor 
from a month of planning they were turned away 
from the luncheon which might have saved them through 
its regular plaudits and calls to order.  
Instead they turned immediately back 
after some while waiting with other members 
in vying groups where the sound rose and narrowed, 
and from the dim hushed hall those five ladies,  
my individual patrons, came across  
the park together, under a hefty sun,  
I worked on a cruising vessel one season  
and saw a woman being led below  
about a minute after she had vaulted  
the rail, and now her face cluttered with casts  
of hair returned to me, and a suggestion  
of the odor of moist wool. Then, after  
ordering, over the tinkle of service,  
the ladies called me and began the question  
of a particular person none had touched,  
wondering by turns in words like these: 

one night along the lakeside or followed streams  
in the dark and mating mayflies swarmed him  
or he was caught by a swirl of slippery  
animals risen from rotted cresses.  
that red and yellow spattering his coat  
showed him the partial form of brain and bill  
established the problem but in studious  
becoming a sphere once when something hurt  
and must have failed. He is a cylinder  
and lacking the perfected self-containment  
of the sphere he nonetheless has beauty  
The third advanced the first with this addition:  
he planted a happy garden for himself  
and tried to bring a boyish girl inside  
The fourth supposed some more years and less hope  
and figured on effects of disaffection:  
came creeping like things of the undersea  
surrounding him that gave him the first fevered  
The last lady came near to reconciling  
unawares once and he flinched and flinching  
has made him beautiful to all of us 
who admire huge eyed skittishness, the fawn  
standing some steps off always awkward and  

a gale to bank and shrill in company,  
then at the heavy time of it they hush 
and float broadcast. Those ladies did the same  
the other Tuesday. Hopeless and breathless,  
both I and they rode like sitting birds into  
a last lull, and I was not (as you have seen)  
prepared by quick calamities of ocean  
labor for land bound suffering at ease.  
Understanding or unconcern could serve  
but pain and malice won, and who may be  
forgiven even his shapeless victories?  
came in the petal fall under a secret 
tree, who meets his vague eyes with beaming gaps 

think you back.

You fail far away from me,
waving at pain.

A perfect song is loveless
and here by your name.

Things will never be the same.
Are they the same yet?

I
wrought from hypochondria of the well-
swirls on smiling genuflections of
lilac limousine, the cynosure
and half admiring his outrageous flair.

await euphoria. With deadly vigor
she prepares the way for mystery

he telephones instructions for a long
into the green fountainous twilight, sighs
and turns the gold-plate dial to Music For
cigarettes rehearses in his mind
a new device that he must use tonight.

a hallelujah wave for him to walk.
conduct him choiring to the altar-stage,
a lighted Jesus painted sealskin-brown.
of Israel, receive my blessing now.
as toward a lover, exults before the image
in meditation, letting their eyes caress
to fall, to flow from his tall figure
dramatically just so. Then all at once
he sways, quivers, gesticulates as if
again he utters wildering vocables,
Cries of eudaemonic pain attest
And now in subtly altering light he chants
but which is his alone.
He signals: tambourines begin, frenetic
conjurer. And of himself as God.

It is her right, to bind with warmest ties, 
Making his home an earthly paradise, 
Twining around each fibre of his heart, 

It is her right to teach the infant mind, 
To root out evil passions that would bind 
To lead the erring spirit gently back, 

It is her right to soothe the couch of pain; 
To calm with gentle care the frenzied brain, 
To watch untiring by the lonely bed, 

She is a flower that blossoms best, unseen, 

There's a word you've met but once and now forgotten
a small pouch that must be kissed and kissed again
and where last night in the sleeping dark a lone mosquito
venom and a couple of love-bites
you'll blaze with the minute but unassuageable
into the mud of memory might be the right cooling balm for.

In the dark irritation of the eyes there is a snake hiding

In the exhalations of Americans there is a crumbling empire

In the foul waters of the rivers there are Palestinians

OUT OUT of its borders pain has a leash on its neck

In the wheat stalks there are insects vaccinated against bread

In the Arabian boats there are sharks shaken with laughter

In the deluge on our plains there are no rains but stones

is a letter I read and put away, a daily reminder

still capable of inflicting pain

Like a painting, our talk is dense with description,

with a patina over time. When she came into my life

Or is that only how it seems now, looking back?

Long ago, this desert was an inland sea. In the mountains

toe-and-finger holes along the three hundred and fifty-seven foot

of the dead hovers about its earthly home

Today all good Jews collect their crimes like old clothes

I remember how my father held his father around the shoulders

"We're almost there, Pop," he said. "A few more blocks."

for someone has mapped this autumn field with meaning, and any day

Who showed the world the world itself
A high-born leader in a long,

Poor farmers, blacks, homeless, the least
Magnificently unarrayed,

A lady first, the great first lady
And said, There is no room for fear

A Legacy of Love
A Heavenly Father would suffice

1
Our last night in the house was not our last.
With two cats in the yard. Our movers took
the furniture in the morning. A country where
they turned back time. Lifting a trunk, Dad felt
something slip in his back. I have become
comfortably numb. No driving with such pain.
The day destroys the night. Our real last night,
footsteps on hardwood floors. People and friends
I still can recall. Sean with his singles player.
Dream until your dream comes true. Dan,
an even match across the ping-pong table.
They're the faces of the stranger. A girlfriend
I'm already standing on the ground.
Training for cross country with the other,
better runners. Get up, get up, get out
of the door. A twenty-mile summer
thunderstorm. Into this world we're thrown.
The melancholy of second place. I've paid
my dues, time after time. The dream the Red Sox
might someday win it all. When I was young,
it seemed that life was so wonderful.

2
Leaving the morning with Dad in the back.
The danger on the rocks is surely past.
Big sisters with licenses. Baby you can drive
my car. One last trip West. Running into
the sun. Not down through the desert to Christmas
on a San Diego beach. All the leaves
are brown. Not down from the Rockies to speed
across Nevada. Like endless rain into
a paper cup. No stop in Medicine Bow,
highway hung on a ridge. Mountains come
out of the sky. No hummingbirds surrounding
my uncle's Colorado cabin. Come
with me or go alone. Instead we went
to North Dakota, then up to Winnipeg
to visit cousins. Leave us helpless, helpless,
helpless. The even more endless highways
of Canada. Get your kicks. In Glacier,
footsteps without sound, each breath clouding
another constellation. Open up
your mind and float downstream. Front-row seats
for the Red Sox in Seattle. Sweet
little sixteen. A foul ball that Dad
leapt up to grab. Joltin' Joe has left
and gone away. Going on to Palo Alto.
Be sure to wear some flowers in your hair.
Arriving on Labor Day, Grace Slick's concert
spilling into the new backyard. One pill
makes you larger, and one pill makes you small.
Our first night in the house, and not our last.
Johnny come lately, there's a new kid in town.

I want Rattawut Lapcharoensap to write my biography.

not home. I want to make him coffee. I know that he
will want to tape record all of our sessions, and

after I die I want these tapes catalogued and archived
in the temperature controlled basement of an ivy league

university library. Additionally, I would like
my biography to have a neon purple dust jacket and

I would like Nancy Milford to grant us permission
to call the book Zelda even though there is already

a book called Zelda because it is about the life of Zelda
Fitzgerald. Maybe because it is just one word and

not a lawyer. Also: I would like Martin Scorsese to direct

the movie based on the book based on my real life.

I just saw it last night and my life is almost exactly like that
except instead of Boston I grew up in Chicago, and instead

of going to police academy I toured with Cirque du Soleil.
If Rattawut could just get a hold of a copy of the screenplay

and make Matt Damon a female trapeze artist
who was born to Prussian immigrant parents in 1984,

Have any of you ever tried to think of all the different ways

you could disappoint your parents and then done them?
I chose the calliope over the violin; I ran with gypsies;

I dated a boy three years younger than me just because

with my parents anymore. I want Rattawut to tell me

while I show him old photographs and wait to see

to me after I turn 23, but when my biography comes out
I will have to avoid the reviews and the interviews

and any website that gives away the ending.
I will probably have to spend a few weeks in a cabin

with my boyfriend in order to marry Rattawut

beneath a chuppah in the western suburbs of Chicago

my father is, and any tradition is better than none.
When Rattawut gives me my autographed copy,

enrolled in summer programs for the gifted and talented.

playing leapfrog, dressed up like Elizabeth Cady Stanton.

to pain medication, my lepidopterophobia,

my failed marriages, my miscarriages, the fire

the one that describes in vivid detail the flames

that will erupt from my fatal motorcycle accident
somewhere in the Badlands, how it will take weeks

I want to fake my death on Facebook. I want a pony.

